
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74846 ***

=Transcriber’s Note:= The author’s transliteration of Arabic words into
English is inconsistent, and often wrong in its usage of the ʾ and ʿ
characters. They have been left as printed (except where such marks were
missing entirely, in which case they have been supplied correctly).

On page 143 ‎‏غزاّلي‏‎ was changed to ‎‏غزّالي‏‎.




A Moslem Seeker After God




By S. M. Zwemer, F. R. G. S.


_Mohammed or Christ._ Illustrated.

    _Introduction by Rt. Rev. C. H. Stileman, M. A., sometime
    Bishop of Persia_

    An account of the rapid spread of Islam in all parts of the
    globe, the methods employed to obtain proselytes, its immense
    press, its strongholds, and suggested means to be adopted to
    counteract the evil.

_The Disintegration of Islam._ Illustrated, 12mo, cloth

    Dr. Zwemer traces the collapse of Islam as a political power in
    Europe, Asia and Africa, as well as the inevitable effect of
    the impact of Western civilization.

_Childhood in the Moslem World._ Illustrated, 8vo, cloth

    Both in text and illustrations, Dr. Zwemer’s new book covers
    much ground hitherto lying untouched in Mohammedan literature.

_Arabia: The Cradle of Islam._ Maps and numerous Illustrations, cloth

    “The comprehensive scope of the volume covers a wide range of
    interest, scientific and commercial, historical and literary,
    sociological, religious.”—_Outlook._

By A. E. and S. M. Zwemer

_Zigzag Journeys in the Camel Country._ Arabia in Picture and Story.
Illustrated, 12mo, cloth

    “Dr. and Mrs. Zwemer are charming guides. We commend the book
    highly for interest and information.”—_Missionary Review of the
    World._

_Topsy-Turvy Land._ Arabia Pictured for Children. Illustrated, 12mo, cloth

    “A book of pictures and stories for big children and small
    grown-up folk, for all who love Sinbad the Sailor and his
    strange country.”—_Boston Globe._




[Illustration: The old ruined Mosque at Tus, Persia, probably dating from
the Eleventh Century.]

[Illustration: The supposed grave of Abu Hamid Al Ghazali at Tus.]




                             A Moslem Seeker
                                After God:

                        Showing Islam at its Best
                                    in
                   the Life and Teaching of Al-Ghazali
                       Mystic and Theologian of the
                             Eleventh Century

                                    By
                             SAMUEL M. ZWEMER
           _Author of “The Disintegration of Islam,” “Childhood
                       in the Moslem World,” etc._

                              _ILLUSTRATED_

                              [Illustration]

                             NEW YORK CHICAGO
                        Fleming H. Revell Company
                           LONDON AND EDINBURGH

                           Copyright, 1920, by
                        FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY

                        New York: 158 Fifth Avenue
                      Chicago: 17 North Wabash Ave.
                      London: 21 Paternoster Square
                       Edinburgh: 75 Princes Street




_To the Faculties and Students of the Theological Seminary, New
Brunswick, N. J. and the College of Missions, Indianapolis, Ind. where
the several chapters of this book were given as lectures 1918-1920_




Introduction

By DR. J. RENDEL HARRIS


Al-Ghazali was a rare combination of scholar and saint, of the orthodox
Moslem and the aberrant Sufi. This work is a real contribution to the
history of religion, and will have a peculiar value which attaches to
Sufism at the present time. On the one hand we have the anthropologists
engaged in the task (and for the most part successfully engaged) of
tracing all religions to a common root, or roots, in the constitution
and the fears of primitive man; on the other hand we have the mystics,
of whom the Sufi is a leading representative, who are occupied in
demonstrating experimentally that all religions which start at the bottom
find their way to the top.

William Penn said something in the same direction when he affirmed that
all good men were of the same religion, and that they would know one
another when the livery was off. But what did he mean by taking the
livery off? The abstinence from rites, ceremonies and the like is a
negative process which certainly would not satisfy the genuine Sufi.
He would say with St. Paul, “Not that we would be unclothed, but rather
clothed upon, that mortality may be swallowed up of life.” That is real
mystic language, and suggests that we shall know one another, not so
much by being denuded of tradition and superstition (however desirable
the process may be in some points of view), as by putting on the robe of
light and sitting down in the heavenly places with Jesus Christ, _and
with any one else whom He calls into His companionship_.

Al-Ghazali tells us in his Confessions that he found the true way of life
in Sufism, that is, in Pantheism, yet he remained an orthodox Moslem,
that is, a Transcendentalist. At the present time, when the effects of
a war of unheard and unequalled severity are still perplexing men, the
Transcendent and the Immanent views of God are alike hard put to it.
Sufism is on its back, Transcendentalism can scarcely keep its feet.
It is a poor time of day for seeing God in all, almost as ill a time
for believing Him to be over all. Where speculation fails, or limps
along with lame feet or with broken wing, there must be some other way
of taking us to God Himself, beyond reason and safer than imagination.
Al-Ghazali found it, when he abandoned his lecture-room and went into the
wilderness. While he still continued to recite the formulas, which affirm
the Unity of God and the authority of His Apostle, he found his way into
the Sufi inner sanctuary, where one understands that

                                “he who lies,
    Folded in favour on the Sultan’s breast,
    Needs not a letter nor a messenger.”

The book tells us something about this side of his experience in the
Quest of Life, and when the story is finished we are reminded not to seek
the Living among the dead, but to believe that the same Lord is rich unto
all that call upon Him in truth.

                                                                  J. R. H.

_Friends’ Settlement, Woodbrooke, England._




Preface


There are a score of lives of Mohammed, the great Arabian Prophet, in
the English language, yet there is no popular biography of the greatest
of all Moslems since his day, Al-Ghazali. Even the _Encyclopædia
Britannica_ gives only scant information. Professor Duncan B. Macdonald
prepared a life of Al-Ghazali with special reference to his religious
experiences and influence in a paper published in the twentieth volume
of “The Journal of the American Oriental Society” (1899), but now out
of print. His scholarly investigations and conclusions, however, deal
with Al-Ghazali’s inner experiences and his philosophy, rather than
with his environment and the events of his life. We acknowledge our
great indebtedness to his paper and to the original Arabic sources on
which it was based, especially the introduction to the Commentary on the
_Ihya_ by Sayyid Murtadha in ten volumes and entitled _Ithaf as-saʿada_.
I have found additional material in Al-Ghazali’s writings and other
books mentioned in the bibliography given in the appendix of this book,
especially the _Tabaqat ash-shafaiʾya_ by As-Subqi, who wrote long before
Murtadha and to whom Macdonald refers, but whose work he did not use.

The study of Al-Ghazali’s life and writings will, more than anything
else, awaken a deeper sympathy for that which is highest and strongest in
the religion of Islam; for the student of his works learns to appreciate
Islam at its best. As Jalal-ud-din says:

    “Fools buy false coins because they are like the true.
    If in the world no genuine minted coin
    Were current, how would forgers pass the false?
    Falsehood were nothing unless truth were there,
    To make it specious. ’Tis the love of right
    Lures men to wrong. Let poison but be mixed
    With sugar, they will cram it into their mouths.
    Oh, cry not that all creeds are vain! Some scent
    Of truth they have, else they would not beguile.”

There is a real sense in which Al-Ghazali may be used as a schoolmaster
to lead Moslems to Christ. His books are full of references to the
teaching of Christ. He was a true seeker after God.

Islam is the prodigal son, the Ishmael, among the non-Christian
religions; this is a fact we may not forget. Now we read in Christ’s
matchless parable of the prodigal how “When he was yet a great way
off his father saw him and ran out to meet him and fell on his neck
and kissed him.” Have missionaries always had this spirit? No one
can read the story of Al-Ghazali’s life, so near and yet so far from
the Kingdom of God, so eager to enter and yet always groping for the
doorway, without fervently wishing that Al-Ghazali could have met a
true ambassador of Christ. Then surely this great champion of the Moslem
faith would have become an apostle of Christianity in his own day and
generation. By striving to understand Al-Ghazali we may at least better
fit ourselves to help those who, like him, are earnest seekers after God
amid the twilight shadows of Islam. His life also has a lesson for us all
in its devout Theism and in its call to the practice of the Presence of
God.

                                                                  S. M. Z.

_Cairo, Egypt._




Contents


  I.    THE ELEVENTH CENTURY                       19

  II.   BIRTH AND EDUCATION                        51

  III.  TEACHING, CONVERSION, AND RETIREMENT       81

  IV.   WANDERINGS, LATER YEARS AND DEATH         111

  V.    HIS CREED AND CREDULITY                   145

  VI.   HIS WRITINGS                              169

  VII.  HIS ETHICS                                195

  VIII. AL-GHAZALI AS A MYSTIC                    219

  IX.   JESUS CHRIST IN AL-GHAZALI                255

        APPENDIX:

          A. Bibliography                         295

          B. Translations of Al-Ghazali’s Works   297

          C. List of Al-Ghazali’s Works           299

          D. Comparative Table of Events          303




Illustrations


  The old ruined Mosque at Tus, Persia, probably dating
    from the Eleventh Century                                _Frontispiece_

  The supposed grave of Abu Hamid Al-Ghazali at Tus                ”

                                                              _Facing page_

  The East Gate, Damascus                                               54

  Interior of the Great Mosque at Damascus. In the center
    the _Mihrab_ showing the direction of prayer and to
    the right the Great Pulpit                                         106

  The Dome of the Rock, Jerusalem, as seen from the Lutheran
    Church                                                             126

  Pen-case of Al-Ghazali, made of brass inlaid with silver,
    preserved in the Arab Museum, Cairo                                172

  A facsimile page of the _Ihya_ (Vol. II, page 180, Cairo Ed.).
    It gives a diagram of the prayer _kibla_ and the rules to be
    observed in facing it correctly                                    180

  Facsimile title page of the last book Al-Ghazali wrote, entitled
    “Minhaj Al-ʾAbidin.” On the margin this Cairo edition gives
    another of his celebrated works, “Badayat-al-Hadaya”               232

  A _Mihrab_ or prayer-niche made of cedar wood and dating from
    the Eleventh Century. (Cairo Museum)                               242




I

The Eleventh Century

    “Between the civilizations of Christendom and Islam there is
    a gulf which no human genius, no concourse of events, can
    entirely bridge over. The most celebrated Orientals, whether in
    war or policy, in literature or learning, are little more than
    names for Europeans.”

                —_“The Assemblies of Al-Hariri,” by Thomas Chenery._

    “With the time came the man. He was Al-Ghazali, the greatest,
    certainly the most sympathetic figure in the history of Islam,
    and the only teacher of the after generations ever put by a
    Muslim on a level with the four great Imams. The equal of
    Augustine in philosophical and theological importance. By his
    side the Aristotelian philosophers of Islam, Ibn Rushd and
    all the rest, seem beggarly compilers and scholiasts. Only
    Al-Farabi, and that in virtue of his mysticism, approaches him.
    In his own person he took up the life of his time on all its
    sides and with it all its problems. He lived through them all
    and drew his theology from his experience.”

                             —_“Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and
                             Constitutional Theory,” by D. B. Macdonald._


I

THE ELEVENTH CENTURY

The great characters of history may be compared to mountain peaks that
rise high above the plains and the lower foot-hills and are visible from
great distances because they dominate the landscape. In the historical
study of Islam four names stand out prominently. They are those of
Mohammed himself; of Al-Bokhari, the most celebrated collector of the
Traditions; of Al-Ashʾari, the great dogmatic theologian and the opponent
of rationalism; and of Al-Ghazali, the reformer and mystic. The last
named has left a larger imprint upon the history of Islam than any man
save Mohammed himself. “If there had been a prophet after Mohammed,” said
As-Suyuti, “it would have been Al-Ghazali.”

It is in his life, and more especially in his writings, that I believe
we can see Islam at its best. In trying to escape the dead weight of
Tradition and the formalism of its requirements, Moslems are more and
more finding relief in the way of the mystic. Of all those who have found
a deeper spiritual meaning in the teachings of the Koran and even in the
multitudinous and puerile detail of the Moslem ritual, none can equal
Al-Ghazali. “He was,” says Jamal-ud-Din, “the pivot of existence and the
common pool of refreshing waters for all, the soul of the purest part
of the people of the Faith, and the road for obtaining the satisfaction
of the Merciful.... He became the unique one of his own day and for all
time among the Moslem learned.” “Al-Ghazali,” said another writer, nearly
contemporary, “is an _imam_ by whose name breasts are dilated and souls
revived, in whose literary productions the ink horn exults and the paper
quivers with joy, and at the hearing of whose message voices are hushed
and heads are bowed.”

A celebrated saint, Ahmed As-Sayyed Al-Yamani Az-Zabîdi, also a
contemporary of Al-Ghazali, said, “When I was sitting one day, lo, I
perceived the gates of heaven opened, and a company of blessed angels
descended, having with them a green robe and a precious steed. They stood
by a certain grave and brought forth its tenant and clothed him in the
green robe and set him on the steed and ascended with him from heaven to
heaven, till he passed the seven heavens and rent after them sixty veils,
and I know not whither at last he reached. Then I asked about him, and
was answered, ‘This is the Imam Al-Ghazali.’ That was after his death;
may God Most High have mercy on him!”

Another story is related of him as follows: “In our time there was a man
in Egypt who disliked Al-Ghazali and abused him and slandered him. And he
saw the Prophet (God bless him and give him peace!) in a dream; Abu Bakr
and ʾOmar (may God be well pleased with both of them!) were at his side,
and Al-Ghazali was sitting before him, saying, ‘O Apostle of God, this
man speaks against me!’ Thereupon the Prophet said, ‘Bring the whips!’
So the man was beaten on account of Al-Ghazali. Then the man arose from
sleep, and the marks of the whips remained on his back, and he was wont
to weep and tell the story.”

And should this praise seem oriental and extravagant, we add the words
of Professor Duncan B. Macdonald, who has made a more thorough study of
Al-Ghazali’s life and writings than any other student of Islam:—“What
rigidity of grasp the hand of Islam would have exercised but for
the influence of Al-Ghazali might be hard to tell; he saved it from
scholastic decrepitude, opened before the orthodox Moslem the possibility
of a life hid in God, was persecuted in his life as a heretic, and now
ranks as the greatest doctor of the Moslem Church.”

To understand the importance of Al-Ghazali and of his teaching we must
transport ourselves to the time in which he lived. We cannot understand
a man unless we know his environment. Biography is only a thread in the
vast web of history, in which time is broad as well as long. Al-Ghazali
belongs to the small company of torch bearers in the Dark Ages.

He was born at Tus, in Khorasan, Persia, in the year 1058 A. D., and died
in 1111 A. D. When Al-Ghazali was born Togrul Bey had just taken Bagdad,
Henry IV was Emperor, Nicholas II was Pope, the Norman conquest had just
begun in the west, and Asia Minor was overrun by the Turks in the Near
East. Among Al-Ghazali’s other contemporaries in the west were Hildebrand
the Pope, Abelard, Bernard, Anselm, and Peter the Hermit. About the time
he wrote his greatest work, Godfrey of Bouillon was King of Jerusalem.
Al-Ghazali was struggling with the problem of Islam in its relation to
the human heart thirsting for God, about two hundred years after Al-Kindi
had written his remarkable apology for the Christian faith at the court
of Haroun-ar-Rashîd and two hundred years before Raymond Lull laid down
his life a martyr in North Africa.

The condition of the Moslem world had utterly changed since the days when
Busrah with its rival city Kufa were dominated by the victorious Arabs
of Omar’s Caliphate. The Abbasside Caliphs of the eleventh century were
almost as much the shadows of former power as the Emperors of the East;
they retained little more than their religious supremacy. Togrul Bey, the
grandson of Seljuk, had been confirmed by the powerless Caliph Al-Qaʾim
bi-amr Allah, in all his conquests, loaded with honours, saluted as King
of the East and West, and endowed with the hand of the Caliph’s daughter.
In the next reign, that of Al-Muqtadi, the Seljuk Turks captured
Jerusalem.

“About the year 1000,” says Nöldeke,[1] “Islam was in a very bad way. The
Abbasside Caliphate had long ceased to be of any importance, the power
of the Arabs had long ago been broken. There was a multitude of Islamite
States, great and small; but even the most powerful of these, that of the
Fatimids, was very far from being able to give solidity to the whole,
especially as it was Shiʾite.... These nomads (the Turks) caused dreadful
devastation, trampled to the ground the flourishing civilization of
vast territories, and contributed almost nothing to the culture of the
human race; but they mightily strengthened the religion of Mohammed. The
rude Turks took up with zeal the faith which was just within reach of
their intellectual powers, and they became its true, often fanatical,
champions against the outside world. They founded the powerful empire of
the Seljuks, and conquered new regions for Islam in the northwest. After
the downfall of the Seljuk empire they still continued to be the ruling
people in all its older portions. Had not the warlike character of Islam
been revived by the Turks, the Crusaders perhaps might have had some
prospect of more enduring success.”

Togrul Bey was invested with the title of Sultan in the royal city of
Nishapur, A. D. 1038. According to Gibbon, he was the “father of his
soldiers and of his people. By a firm and equal administration Persia was
relieved from the evils of anarchy; and the same hands which had been
imbrued in blood became the guardians of justice and the public peace.
The more rustic, perhaps the wisest, portion of the Turkmans continued
to dwell in the tents of their ancestors; and, from the Oxus to the
Euphrates, these military colonies were protected and propagated by their
native princes. But the Turks of the court and city were refined by
business and softened by pleasure: they imitated the dress, language, and
manners of Persia; and the royal palaces of Nishapur and Rei displayed
the order and magnificence of a great monarchy. The most deserving of the
Arabians and Persians were promoted to the honours of the state; and the
whole body of the Turkish nation embraced with fervour and sincerity the
religion of Mahomet.”[2]

The first of the great Seljuk Sultans was conspicuous by his zeal for
the Moslem faith. He spent much time in prayer, and in every city which
he conquered built new mosques. By force of arms he delivered the Caliph
of Bagdad at the head of an irresistible force and taught the people of
Mosul and Bagdad the lesson of obedience. Rescued from his enemies, the
alliance between the Caliph and the Sultan was cemented by the marriage
of Togrul’s sister with the successor of the Prophet. In 1063 Togrul
died and his nephew Alp Arslan succeeded him. His name, therefore, was
pronounced after that of the Caliph in public prayer by all the Moslems
of the Near East.

The character of his rule Gibbon gives us in a sentence: “The myriads of
Turkish horse overspread a frontier of 600 miles from Taurus to Erzeroum,
and the blood of 136,000 Christians was a grateful sacrifice to the
Arabian prophet.” The “valiant lion,” for that is the significance of
his name, displayed at once the fierceness and generosity of a typical
Oriental ruler. Christians suffered dreadful persecution. Enemies were
assassinated; but the learned, the rich, and the favoured were lavishly
rewarded. Arslan was a valiant warrior of the faith and as eager for the
battlefield as those whom Moore describes:—

    “One of that saintly murderous brood
    To carnage and the Koran given,
    Who think through unbeliever’s blood
    Lies their directest path to heaven.
    One who will pause and kneel unshod
    In the warm blood his hand hath poured
    To mutter o’er some text of God
    Engraven on his reeking sword.”

Armenia was laid waste in the cruelest manner when the capital was taken
on June 6, 1064. We are told that “human blood flowed in torrents, and
so great was the carnage, that the streets were literally choked up with
dead bodies; and the waters of the river were reddened from the quantity
of bloody corpses.” The wealthy inhabitants were tortured, the churches
pillaged, and the priests flayed alive. Al-Ghazali was then six years old.

In 1072 Alp Arslan was assassinated. His eldest son, Malek Shah,
succeeded him. He extended the conquests of his father beyond the Oxus
as far as Bokhara and Samarkand, until his name was inserted on the
coins and in the prayers of the Tartar kingdom on the borders of China.
“From the Chinese frontiers, he stretched his immediate jurisdiction or
feudatory sway to the west and south, as far as the mountains of Georgia,
the neighbourhood of Constantinople, the holy city of Jerusalem, and the
spicy groves of Arabia Felix. Instead of resigning himself to the luxury
of the harem, the shepherd king, both in peace and war, was in action in
the field.”

Nizam Al-Mulk was his vizier, and it is largely due to his influence that
the study of science and literature revived to such a remarkable degree.
The calendar was reformed, schools and colleges erected, and the learned
competed with each other for the favour of royalty. For thirty years
Nizam Al-Mulk was honoured by the Caliph as the very oracle of religion
and science. But at the age of ninety-three, the venerable statesman, to
whom, as we shall see later, Al-Ghazali owed so much, was dismissed by
his master, accused by his enemies, and murdered by a fanatic. The last
words of Nizam attested his innocence, and the remainder of Malek’s life
was short and inglorious.

The Arabic language had become dominant everywhere. Its vocabulary had
leavened the whole lump of languages in the Near East. Every race with
which the Arabs came in contact was more or less Arabized. “The extent
of this influence,” says Chenery,[3] “may be perceived by comparing the
Persian of Firdausi with that of Saʾdi. The language of the former,
who flourished in the early part of our eleventh century, is tolerably
pure, while the Gulistan, which was produced some two hundred and fifty
years later, is in some places little more than a piecing together of
Arabic words with a cement of the original tongue. It is to be noticed,
also, that the latter author introduces continually Arabic verses, as
the highest ornaments of his work, and assumes that his readers are
acquainted with this classic and sacred tongue.”

Trade routes extended everywhere. There was intercourse with India and
China on the east, as well as with the Spice Islands, so called, of
Malaysia. Caravans carried trade across the whole of Central Asia and
Northern Arabia to the emporiums of the West. Spain had intercourse with
Persia. Al-Hariri praises Busrah “as the spot where the ship and the
camel meet, the sea fish and the lizard, the camel-leader and the sailor,
the fisher and the tiller.” In other words it was the port and emporium
for all the lands watered by the Euphrates and Tigris. The same was true
of Alexandria for the West.

We have evidences that an extensive trade was carried on between Arabia
and China in walrus and ivory. An extensive work exists written in
Chinese in the twelfth century on trade with the Arabs of which a recent
translation has been published at Petrograd. More remarkable still is the
fact that in Scandinavia thousands of Kufic coins have been found, nearly
all of which date from the eleventh century. This would indicate that
even this remote part of Europe was in touch with the Near East.[4]

Judging from literature and history, it was a time of looseness of morals
and of divorce between religion and ethics, even more startling than
in the world of Islam to-day. There were those who wrote commentaries
on the marvels of the Koran, like Al-Harawi, yet did not scruple to
indulge in private wine-drinking and carousals and loose conversation.
The place of wine, women, and song, not only in popular literature and
poetry, but even in the table talk of theologians and philosophers is
clear evidence. Huart remarks in regard to the celebrated “Book of the
Monasteries,” which is an anthology of the convents of the Near East:
“We must not forget that, when Moslems went to Christian cloisters,
it was not to seek devotional impulses, but simply for the sake of an
opportunity of drinking wine, the use of which was forbidden in the
Mohammedan towns. The poets, out of gratitude, sang the praises of the
blessed spots where they had enjoyed the delights of intoxication.” Those
who dared to preach and write against this public immorality had to
suffer the consequences; and because hypocrites were in power reformers
were not heeded.

We read of Ibn Hamdun (1101-1167), that when he openly attacked the
evils which he saw around him in Bagdad, he was dismissed from his
public office as secretary of state, cast into prison, and left to die.
Punishments were cruel. Amputations for theft, in accordance with the
Koran legislation, were matters of such every-day occurrence that the
maimed man was always a suspect. We read of Al-Zamakhshari, that one of
his feet had been frost-bitten during a winter storm, necessitating an
amputation, and so he went about with a wooden leg, but he also carried
about with him a written testimony of witnesses to prove that he had been
maimed by accident, and not in punishment for a crime.

Al-Baihaki, the chronicler of the court at Bagdad, shows us that the
zeal for the faith was often accompanied by a reckless disregard for
the law of Islam as regards the use of fermented liquor. Not only the
soldiers and their officers had drunken brawls, but the Sultan Masʾud
used to enjoy regular bouts in which he frequently saw his fellow topers
“under the table.” Here is a scene represented as having taken place at
Ghazni, the capital of Khorasan province. “Fifty goblets and flagons of
wine were brought from the pavilion into the garden, and the cups began
to go round. ‘Fair measure,’ said the amir, ‘and equal cups—let us drink
fair.’ They grew merry and the minstrels sang. One of the courtiers had
finished five tankards—each held nearly a pint of wine—but the sixth
confused him, the seventh bereft him of his senses, and at the eighth he
was consigned to his servants. The doctor was carried off at his fifth
cup; Khalil Dawud managed ten, Siyabiruz nine, and then they were taken
home; everybody rolled or was rolled away, till only the Sultan and the
Khwaja Abd-ar-Razzak remained. The Khwaja finished eighteen goblets and
then rose, saying, ‘If your slave has any more he will lose both his
wits and his respect for your Majesty.’ Masʾud went on alone, and after
he had drunk twenty-seven full cups, he too arose, called for water and
prayer-carpet, washed, and recited the belated noon and sunset prayers
together as soberly as if he had not tasted a drop; then mounted his
elephant and rode to the palace.”[5]

Masʾud was put to death in 1040. His sons and descendants for more than
a century ruled this part of the Moslem world. But Ghazni fell from the
proud position of the capital of a kingdom to a mere dependency of the
Empire of Malek Shah.

The eleventh century was a period when the nations of Western Europe
were beginning to crystallize both as regards their governments and
civilization. Their influence was felt at home and abroad, although
the masses were still in the depths of barbarism. Among the clergy and
nobility something of order and civilization, and social development
had appeared, but we are told by one writer that it was a striking
characteristic of the time to find side by side with barbarian violence
and disorder, and the constant display of the most brutal passions,
a strong religious feeling. This feeling often took the form of
superstition and fanaticism, the performance of meritorious works,
especially a pilgrimage to the holy sepulcher. Thousands risked their
life and health, and spent all their fortune to reach the holy city, with
the same devotion and sacrifice which we still witness among the ardent
Russian pilgrims of to-day.

When Asia Minor and Syria were conquered by the Turks this access to
Jerusalem was cut off. In 1076 (Al-Ghazali was then eighteen years
old) they massacred three thousand of these Christian people and their
subsequent rule was relentless in its tyranny. We read that “the
venerable Patriarch was dragged by the hair along the streets, and cast
into a dungeon; the clergy of every sect were insulted; and the unhappy
pilgrims were made to suffer every indignity and abuse.”

This treatment of Christian pilgrims produced a storm of indignation and
anger throughout the West. Peter the Hermit himself visited Jerusalem
and returned to Europe to arouse the nations. The result was the first
Crusade, in which Pope Urban II coöperated. Three hundred thousand
half-armed, half-naked peasants forced their way across Europe along the
Rhine and the Danube. Only one-third of their number reached the shores
of Asia. There they were utterly destroyed and only a pyramid of bones
remained to tell of their fate.

The Crusade under Godfrey of Bouillon was a well-appointed military
expedition embracing the flower of Europe. There are said to have been
mustered in the plains of Bithynia one hundred thousand horsemen in
full armour and six hundred thousand footmen. These numbers may be
exaggerated, and pestilence and famine thinned their ranks, but in less
than three years they had attained the great object of their expedition.
In 1097 they laid siege to Nicea and captured it. They advanced against
Antioch and after seven weary months laid siege to the city. In 1099
they advanced on Jerusalem and after a siege of forty days the holy city
surrendered. “The merciless Franks did not fail to inflict a terrible
vengeance for their own sufferings and the indignities which had been
heaped upon their religion and their race. The Jews were burned in their
synagogues; and seventy thousand Moslems were put to the sword. For three
days the city was given up to indiscriminate pillage and massacre, until
a pestilence was bred by the putrefaction of the slain.”

Soon Godfrey and his successors extended their dominions until only four
cities, Aleppo, Damascus, Hamath, and Hums remained in the possession of
the Moslems in Syria. Everywhere the followers of the Prophet were filled
with grief and shame and with a great longing to wipe away the disgrace
which had fallen on their religion.

“In the year 492 A. H.,” says Muir,[6] “consternation was spread
throughout the land by the capture of Jerusalem, and cruel treatment of
its inhabitants. Preachers went about proclaiming the sad story, kindling
revenge, and rousing men to recover from infidel hands the Mosque of
Omar, and scene of the Prophet’s heavenly flight. But whatever the
success elsewhere, the mission failed in the East, which was occupied
with its own troubles, and moreover cared little for the Holy Land,
dominated as it then was by the Fatimide faith. Crowds of exiles, driven
for refuge to Bagdad, and joined there by the populace, cried out for
war against the Franks. But neither Sultan nor Caliph had ears to hear.
For two Fridays the insurgents, with this cry, stormed the Great Mosque,
broke the pulpit and throne of the Caliph in pieces, and shouted down the
service; but that was all. No army went.”

Among Moslems themselves religious rancour abounded. At present the four
orthodox sects worship together and live in peace as neighbours, but in
those days there were frequent and hot disputes between the rival schools
and much controversial literature arose, so that the hatred between the
sects was deep and bitter. The Persian historian, Mirkhond, has recorded
a fact which shows how implacable the feeling had become towards the
close of the Caliphate. When the Mongols of Genghiz Khan appeared before
the city of Rei, they found it divided into two factions—the one composed
of Shafiʾites, the other of Hanifites. The former at once entered into
secret negotiations undertaking to deliver up the city at night, on
condition that the Mongols massacred the members of the other sect. The
Mongols, never reluctant to shed blood, gladly accepted these proposals,
and being admitted into the city, slaughtered the Hanifites without mercy.

It was in this atmosphere of mutual hatred, of war and bloodshed, that
Al-Ghazali spent the last years of his life. We may excuse in him much of
what would otherwise seem intolerant and hateful, when we remember how
the passion of war blinds human judgment and makes it impossible to see
any virtue in the invader.

We must not forget that Al-Ghazali came into close touch with Oriental
Christians from his boyhood.[7] Christianity was established in Persia
at the time of the Moslem conquest, and the Nestorian Church withstood
its terrific impact when Zoroastrianism was almost destroyed. The coming
of the Arabs meant to the Christians only a change of masters. The
Nestorians became the _rayah_, “people of protection,” of the Caliphs.
They did not immediately sink into their present deplorable condition.
They still conducted foreign missions and during the entire Abbasside
period remained a very important factor of civilization in the East.
They were permitted to restore their Churches, but not to build new
ones; they were forbidden to bear arms or ride a horse, save in case
of necessity, and they even then had to dismount on meeting a Moslem;
they were subject to the usual poll-tax. Yet the Nestorians were the
most powerful non-Moslem community while the Caliphs reigned at Bagdad
(750-1258), and had a higher tradition of civilization than their
masters. They were used at court as physicians, scribes, and secretaries,
and thus gained great influence, having much freedom in canonical
matters, elected Patriarchs, etc. The Arab scholarship which came to
Spain, and was a great factor in mediæval learning, begins in great part
with the Nestorians of Bagdad. They handed on to their Arab masters the
Greek culture which was inherited in Syriac translations. So we find
the Caliphs treating them as chief of the Christian communities, and at
times civil authority over all Christians had been given to the Nestorian
Patriarch.

Early in the eleventh century Al-Biruni, a Moslem writer from Khiva,
mentions the Nestorians as the most civilized of the Christian
communities under the Caliph. He says that there are three sects of
Christians—Melchites, Nestorians and Jacobites. “The most numerous
of them are the Melchites and Nestorians; because Greece and the
adjacent countries are all inhabited by Melchites, whilst the majority
of the inhabitants of Syria, Irak and Mesopotamia and Khorasan are
Nestorians.”[8]

Al-Ghazali spent his first twenty years in Khorasan. Did he ever become
acquainted with Christianity through perusal of the Gospel? We know that
Arabic, if not Persian, translations existed at this period; and not only
are there many references to Christ and His teaching in Al-Ghazali’s
works, but there are some very few passages accurate enough to be called
quotations. He himself states as we shall see later: “I have read in the
Gospel.”

That there were translations of the Bible into Arabic to which Al-Ghazali
may have had access is probable. Dr. Kilgour tells of Arabic Gospel
manuscripts of the ninth century and of translations of the Old Testament
and portions of the New made in the Fayyoum before 942 A. D. “To the
tenth century belong versions of some books of the Old Testament from
Syriac, others from the LXX., and from the Coptic; and some fresh
translations of the Pentateuch, using the Samaritan text as well as the
Massoretic.”[9]

Diglot manuscripts in Syriac and Arabic are quite numerous. The
manuscript of the four Gospels, of which a few leaves are now in the
British Museum, is a good specimen of such a diglot. It was brought by
Tischendorf from the Syrian Convent of St. Mary Deipara in the Nitrian
Desert. In the early part of the eleventh century an Arabic scholar
made a version of Tatian’s Diatessaron, that early Syriac Harmony of
the Gospels which helped the Christian Church to realize the main facts
concerning our Saviour. A version of the Psalms was prepared in the
middle of the same century for use in the Church services of the papal or
Melchite Greeks. This was translated from the Greek Psalter, and, from
the place where it was first printed, became known afterwards as the
Aleppo Psalter.[10] It remains an interesting question whether Al-Ghazali
in his travels, or while still in Khorasan, ever examined the New
Testament.

We are told that the Jews translated their law into Persian by 827 A. D.
It is, therefore, hard to acquit the Christians of Persia of negligence.
Their bishops found time to write learned treatises in Persian and
Arabic, and even to translate Aristotle, but not to give Moslems the
Scriptures. Yet Al-Kindi and others like him, many of whose names and
writings are lost, were not afraid to give their testimony even at the
court of the Caliphs. “The Church,” says W. T. Whiteley,[11] “had not
failed to exercise an influence on Islam around it, while Christians
might not, on peril of death, seek to win converts direct, a command
occasionally violated with honour and success, yet all the development of
Islam at Damascus and Bagdad was in a Christian atmosphere.”

The Christianity of that period was, however, not the religion of Christ
in its purity nor after the example of His love and toleration. Mutual
hatred and suspicion prevented real intercourse of those who, as devout
Christians and devout Moslems, were both seeking God. The Moslem was
feared and the Christian despised. The followers of Jesus were the
enemies of Allah in the eyes of Moslems.

How Christians were regarded at this time we may learn from the books of
canon law of this period, and that immediately following upon it. They
were considered _infidels_ in the Moslem sense of the word, and were
protected only by the payment of a poll tax, which gave them certain
rights as subjects. The most distinguished jurist of the Shafiʾite
sect, An-Nawawi, who taught at Damascus in 1267, lays down the law[12]
as follows: “An infidel who has to pay his poll tax should be treated
by the tax collector with disdain; the collector remaining seated and
the infidel standing before him, the head bent and the body bowed. The
infidel should personally place the money in the balance, while the
collector holds him by the beard and strikes him upon both cheeks.
Infidels should be forbidden to have houses higher than those of their
Moslem neighbours, or even to have them as high; a rule, however, that
does not apply to the infidels who inhabit a separate quarter. An infidel
subject of our Sovereign may not ride a horse; but a donkey or a mule
is permitted him, whatever may be its value. He must use an _ikaf_, and
wooden spurs, those of iron being forbidden him, as well as a saddle.
He must go to the side of the road to let a Moslem pass. He must not
be treated as a person of importance, nor given the first place at a
gathering. He should be distinguished by a suit of coloured cloth and
a girdle outside his clothes. If he enters a bathing house where there
are Moslems, or if he undresses anywhere else in their presence, the
infidel should wear round his neck an iron or leaden necklace, or some
other mark of servitude.[13] He is forbidden to offend Moslems, either by
making them hear his false doctrines, or by speaking aloud of Esdras or
of the Messiah, or by ostentatiously drinking wine or eating pork. And
infidels are forbidden to sound the bells of their churches or of their
synagogues, or celebrate ostentatiously their sacrilegious rites.”[14]

“The history of Christian communities,” says Margoliouth,[15] “under
Moslem rule cannot be adequately written; the members of those
communities had no opportunity of describing their condition safely, and
the Moslems naturally devote little space to their concerns. Generally
speaking, they seem to have been regarded as certain old Greek and Roman
sages regarded women: as a necessary annoyance. Owing to their being
unarmed their prosperity was always hazardous; and though it is true that
this was the case with all the subjects of a despotic state under an
irresponsible ruler, the non-Moslem population was at the mercy of the
mob as well as of the sovereign; they were likely scapegoats whenever
there was distress, and even in the best governed countries periods of
distress frequently arose.”

There are darker shades in the treatment of Christians and in the moral
condition of this period over which one might well draw the veil,
but some of the chapters of Ghazali’s _Ihya_ reflect such terrible
conditions as Margoliouth describes: “A form of passion which is nameless
would appear at one time to have been as familiar among Moslems as of
old among Hellenes. Christian lads seem often to have been the unhappy
objects of this passion. A story is told us by the biographer Yakut of a
young monk of Edessa or Urfah who had the misfortune to attract the fancy
of one Saʾad the copyist. The visits and attentions of this Moslem became
so offensive that the monks had to put a stop to them. Thereupon this
personage pined away, and was finally found dead outside the monastery
wall. The Moslem population declared that the monks had killed him,
and the governor proposed to execute and burn the young monk who had
occasioned the disaster, and scourge his colleagues. They finally got off
by paying a sum of 100,000 dirhems.”

Not only among Moslems, however, but among Christians as well, morals
were at a low ebb in the eleventh century. One of the annalists of the
Roman Church says it was an iron age barren of all goodness, a leaden age
abounding in all wickedness. “Christ was then, as it appears, in a very
deep sleep, when the ship was covered with waves; and what seemed worse,
when the Lord was thus asleep, there were no disciples, who by their
cries might awaken him, being themselves all fast asleep.”

Enemies of the Papacy have perhaps exaggerated the vices and crimes
of the popes in this and the preceding century; but the Church, on the
testimony of its own writers, was immersed in profaneness, sensuality,
and lewdness. When Otho I, Emperor of Germany, came to Rome, he
introduced moral reforms by the power of the sword, but according
to Milner,[16] “The effect of Otho’s regulations was that the popes
exchanged the vices of the rake and the debauchee for those of the
ambitious politician and the hypocrite; and gradually recovered, by a
prudent conduct, the domineering ascendency, which had been lost by
vicious excesses. But this did not begin to take place till the latter
end of the eleventh century.”

Missionary effort in this century was confined to work in Hungary, the
unevangelized portions of Denmark, Poland, and Prussia. Adam of Bremen,
who wrote in 1080, says: “Look at the very ferocious nation of the
Danes. For a long time they have been accustomed, in the praises of
God, to resound Alleluia. Look at that piratical people. They are now
content with the fruits of their own country. Look at that horrid region,
formerly altogether inaccessible on account of idolatry; they now eagerly
admit the preachers of the word.”

The Prussians continued pagans in a great measure throughout this
century. We read that eighteen missionaries sent out to labour among them
were massacred. They seemed to have been among the last of the European
nations to submit to the yoke of Christ.

The noblest figure of the century in the West, in the annals of
Christendom, was undoubtedly that of Anselm. He was born about the
time of Al-Ghazali, and died in 1109. His life in many respects is a
parallel to that of his contemporary. Both were theologians and both
were mystics, seeking rest for their souls in withdrawing from the world
and its allurements. Both were apologists for the Faith and opponents
of infidelity and philosophy. Both exerted an immense influence by
their writings as well as through teaching; and if Al-Ghazali sought
the revival of religious life in Islam through his _Ihya_, Anselm gave
employment to his active mind in writing his celebrated treatise “_Cur
Deus Homo?_” Both of them refuted philosophers in their effort to
establish the Faith.

It is interesting to note in this connection that Anselm’s famous book
is now used in Arabic translation by missionaries to Moslems, and that
Al-Ghazali’s “Confessions” have been put into the hands of the English
reader as a testimony of his sincerity and devotion.

Both Anselm and Al-Ghazali lived and wrote under a deep consciousness of
the world to come, the terrors of the judgment day, and the doom of the
wicked. This also was characteristic of the times.

To understand the time in which Al-Ghazali lived we must also remember
that it was one of great literary activity under the Abbasside Caliphs of
Bagdad and the Seljuk sultans. We have seen how rulers rewarded literary
genius, established schools, and furthered education on religious lines.
Arabic literature affords a galaxy of names during the latter half of the
eleventh century in almost every department of Moslem learning.

Among Ghazali’s celebrated contemporaries, men of literary fame, we may
mention Abiwardi (d. 1113), the poet; Ibn Al-Khayyat, who was born at
Damascus in 1058 and died in Persia in 1125; Al-Ghazi (b. 1049), who
composed elegies and panegyrics at Nizamiyya College, was a college mate
of Ghazali’s, and died in Khorasan; Al-Tarabalusi (b. 1080), a younger
contemporary. But the most famous poet of all was Al-Hariri (1054-1122),
whose “Assemblies” throw so much light on the manners and morals of this
period. Among the men at the Nizamiyya University were Al-Khatîb (b.
1030), the great philologist; and Ibn Al-Arabi, born at Seville in 1076,
who visited Bagdad to attend the teaching of Al-Ghazali. The greatest
of all the Shafiʾite doctors, Al-Ruyani, was also a contemporary of
Al-Ghazali. He taught at Nishapur and wrote the most voluminous book on
jurisprudence in existence, called “The Sea of Doctrine.” In 1108, just
as he had finished one of his lectures he was murdered by a fanatic of
the Assassin sect, who were then holding the castle of Alamut in the
mountains. We must also mention a schoolmate of Al-Ghazali, Al-Harrasi
(1058-1110), who studied at Nishapur under the Imam Al-Haramain, was
made his assistant, and then went to Bagdad, where he taught theology in
the Nizamiyya University for the rest of his life. Nor must we forget
Al-Baghawi, who wrote a famous commentary on the Koran, and other works
of theology (1122); Al-Raghib Al-Ispahani, who died in 1108, and wrote a
dictionary of the Koran, arranged in alphabetical order, called _Mufradat
alfaz Al-Koran_, with quotations from the traditions and from the poets;
he also wrote a treatise on morals, which Al-Ghazali always carried about
with him (_Kitab ad-dharia_), and a commentary on the Koran. Among the
early contemporaries of Al-Ghazali we must not forget to mention Ali bin
ʾUthman Al-Jullabi Al-Hujwiri, the author of the oldest Persian treatise
on Sufism extant. He was born in Ghazni, Afghanistan, and died in A.
D. 1062, when Al-Ghazali was fourteen years old. Al-Hujwiri travelled
far and wide through the Mohammedan Empire and his famous work _Kashf
al-Mahjub_ anticipates much of the teaching of Al-Ghazali, who must have
been familiar with this author. And to complete this already long list
of celebrities, we may mention Al-Maidani of Nishapur, who died in 1124,
having written a great work on Arabic proverbs; Al-Zamakhshari, born in
1074, who wrote a famous commentary on the Koran; Ibn Tumart, the noted
philosopher of the West who attended Al-Ghazali’s lectures at Nizamiyya;
and ash-Shahristani who wrote on the various religions and sects—the
standard work among all Moslems to-day on comparative religion. The
period was in many respects the golden age of Islamic literature, and
it is high praise indeed that, in the judgment of Moslem and Christian,
Al-Ghazali surpassed all his literary contemporaries, if not in style and
eloquence, at least in the scope and character of his writings—still more
by the enduring and outreaching influence of his life. The story of that
life and the character of his message we will now attempt to sketch for
the reader.




II

Birth and Education

    “Ghazali is without doubt the most remarkable figure in all
    Islam. His doctrine is the expression of his own personality.
    He abandoned the attempt to understand this world. But the
    religious problem he comprehended much more profoundly than
    did the philosophers of his time. These were intellectual in
    their methods, like their Greek predecessors, and consequently
    regarded the doctrines of Religion as merely the products
    of the conception or fancy or even caprice of the lawgiver.
    According to them Religion was either blind obedience, or a
    kind of knowledge which contained truth of an inferior order.

    “On the other hand Ghazali represents Religion as the
    experience of his inner Being. It is for him more than law and
    more than Doctrine; it is the Soul’s experience.”

                             —_“Philosophy in Islam,” T. J. DeBoer._


II

BIRTH AND EDUCATION

As already stated, Al-Ghazali was born and educated in Khorasan, Persia,
and there also he spent the closing years of his life. Persia, as Huart
expresses it, possessed “an intangible force, the Aryan genius, the
powerful, imaginative, and creative mind of the great Indo-European
family, the artistic, philosophic, and intellectual brain which, from the
Abbasside period onward, so mightily affected Arab literature, enabling
it to develop in every quarter of the Caliph’s realms, and to produce the
enormous aggregate of works.” It was this Aryan genius which explains
much of the powerful influence of Al-Ghazali upon Moslem thought, and
the revival of that influence in our day when Islam is again facing
disintegrating forces. At the time of Al-Ghazali, Persian influence was
supreme. It pervaded everything. The Arabs had ceased to write. The
realms of poetry, theology, and science, were dominated by those of
Persian birth. All posts, administrative and legal, were held by men who
were not Arabs, and yet the language they used was that of the Koran, and
remained the sole literary language of the huge empire of the Caliphs.
“All races, Persians, Syrians, Berbers from Maghrib, were melted and
amalgamated in this mighty crucible.”

Al-Ghazali was a Persian by birth, an Aryan in his modes of thought,
a Semite in his religion and he became a cosmopolitan by travel and
education. His long residence in all the great centres of Islam of his
day brought him into close touch with men of every school of thought
and followers of all manners of religions and philosophies. When we
remember this, we have the key to his enormous literary productiveness.
His horizon stretched from Afghanistan to Spain, and from Kurdistan to
Southern Arabia. What happened outside the _Dar ul Islam_ in infidel
Europe was brought to the notice of all by the Crusades.

Men of learning had intercourse by correspondence with those of similar
tastes in every part of the Moslem world. We have records of letters
received by Al-Ghazali from Spain and Morocco as well as from Egypt,
Syria, and Palestine. Questions of jurisprudence, philosophy, and
theology were referred by Sultans to celebrated authorities for reply.
All this produced the cosmopolitan atmosphere we find in his works.

The poet Moore describes Al-Ghazali’s native land as

    “... the delightful Province of the Sun,
    The first of Persian lands he shines upon,
    Where, all the loveliest children of his beam,
    Flowerets and fruits blush over every stream,
    And, fairest of all streams, the Murga roves
    Among Merou’s bright palaces and groves.”

[Illustration: The East Gate, Damascus.]

Khorasan, indeed, signifies “the land of the sun,” and was one of the
four geographical divisions into which the ancient kingdom of the
Sassanians was divided. They were named according to the cardinal points
of the compass. After the Arab conquests the name was used both for
a definite province and also in a looser sense for the whole eastern
region of Persia. Even now the boundaries of the province are scarcely
determined. The total area is about 150,000 square miles, and the present
population not over 800,000. It was doubtless far more in Al-Ghazali’s
day.

Towards the north and southwest Khorasan is mountainous. In the east the
country is hilly, but between the mountain ranges there extend broad
tracts of waste land. By far the most extensive of these saline wastes
is the Dasht-i-Kabir, or Great Salt Desert of Khorasan. Throughout the
province, and especially near Tus, the arid plains and the grassy valleys
have been engaged in a perpetual struggle for the mastery. The shifting
sands have already absorbed some towns and villages. There are scarcely
any rivers, and the few streams are brackish and intermittent, losing
themselves in the great salt desert. The salt brought down by the rivers
is deposited in the marshes. The fierce summer heat dries these up until
the winter floods occur again. This process being repeated for ages, in
the course of time the whole stretch of soil over which the marsh extends
has become incrusted with salt.

Travellers and students of climate seem to be agreed that the country
offers unmistakable evidence of desiccation. Ruins of cities and
villages are incredibly numerous and point to a larger population and
better climate and irrigation in the days past. It would not be just to
attribute the decay of Persia entirely to the devastations of war and the
misrule of Islam.

“A comparison of the four provinces of Khorasan, Azerbaijan, Kirman,
and Seyistan is instructive,” says Ellsworth Huntington.[17] Khorasan
“has suffered from war more severely than has any other province of
Persia. Its northern portion, where the rainfall is heaviest, and where
the greatest amount of fighting has taken place, is to-day one of the
most prosperous portions of Persia. It contains numerous ruins, but they
are by no means such impressive features as are those farther south.
The southern and drier part of the province is full of ruins, and has
suffered great depopulation. Azerbaijan, which ... has suffered from
war more than any province except Khorasan, is the most prosperous and
thickly settled part of Persia. The relative abundance of its water
supply renders its future hopeful. Seyistan has suffered from wars, but
less severely than the two preceding provinces. Nevertheless, it has been
depopulated to a far greater extent. Its extreme aridity renders recovery
well-nigh impossible, except along the Helmund. Kirman lies so remote
behind its barriers of desert and mountains that it has suffered from war
much less than any of the three other provinces. Yet its ruined cities
and its appearance of hopeless depopulation are almost as impressive as
those of Seyistan. If war and misgovernment are the cause of the decay
of Persia, it is remarkable that the two provinces which have suffered
most from war, and not less from misgovernment, should now be the most
prosperous and least depopulated; while the two which have suffered less
from war and no more from misgovernment have been fearfully, and, it
would seem, irreparably depopulated.”

The surface of the province of Khorasan to-day consists mainly of
highlands, the saline deserts, and the fruitful well-watered upland
valleys. In these fruitful regions rice, cotton, saffron, but especially
melons and other fruits, are raised in profusion. Other products are
manna, gum, asafœtida for export to India, and turquois. The chief
manufactures have always been sabres, pottery, carpets, woolen and cotton
goods.

The town of Mashad, the present capital of Khorasan, has supplanted the
older city and district of Tus, which was an ancient capital. The ruins
of this city lie fifteen miles to the northwest. As early as the tenth
century we have references to the birthplace of Al-Ghazali. Thus Misʾar
Muhalhil (about 941 A. D.) writes: “Tus is made up of the union of four
towns, two of which are large and the other two of minor importance; its
area is a square mile. It has beautiful monuments that date from the
time of Islam, such as the house of Hamid, son of Kahtabah, the tomb of
Ali, son of Musa, and that of Rashid in the environs (lit. gardens) of
the town.” Istakhri (951 A. D.), writing ten years later, speaks of Tus
as a dependency with four large towns or settlements. He says: “Taking
Tus as a dependency of the province of Nishapur, its towns are Radkan,
Tabaran, Bazdghur, and Naukan, in which (latter) is the tomb of Ali,
son of Musa ar-Riza (may the peace of God be upon him), and the tomb
of Haroun ar-Rashîd.... The tomb of Ar-Riza is about one-quarter of a
_farsakh_ distant towards the village called Sanabadh.” The best summary
of the history of Tus and description of its present condition is given
by Professor A. V. Williams Jackson in his most interesting book, “From
Constantinople to the Home of Omar Khayyam.” He tells us that the name
of the town is as old as the half-legendary warrior Tusa of the Avesta,
who gave battle against Turan. Alexander the Great passed through it in
pursuit of Bessus, the slayer of the last Darius. During the Zoroastrian
sway, the city of Tus shared with Nishapur the distinction of being the
seat of a Nestorian Christian bishop. When the Arab conquest of Persia
came Tus fell before the invaders and it became a great Moslem centre,
famous especially as the home of the poet Firdausi, who was born there
about 935 A. D. and died 1025 A. D.

Professor Jackson thus describes the present ruined condition of the
city: “The crumbling walls of the dead city were once broad and lofty
ramparts of clay and rubble, much like those already mentioned at Bustam
and Rei, but they had become much flattened with the lapse of ages,
although traces of their towers were still to be seen, while their
outline showed the contour of the town, which must have formed a very
irregular quadrilateral, following roughly the points of the compass....
The scene, as we saw it, presented a strange paradox of the destructive
effects of the hand of man, and the eternal power of nature to rise
and bloom again. The devastating inroads of the Ghuzz hordes and the
Mongol armies, aided by earthquakes, had indeed laid mighty Tus in
ruins: but its dust still contains the resurrection seed of flowers and
grain, bringing life anew in the midst of death. Acres of barley and
fields of thick clover spread their rich green on all sides, in contrast
with stretches of arid waste that told only too well the story of ruin
wrought in the past.” Professor Jackson goes on to say: “It is clear
that the ruined site of Tus we have been examining, with the Rudbar
and Rizan Gates, formed part of the borough of Tabaran, an important
section of the town in Firdausi’s day, when the city covered a large
area comprising several thickly populated centres, as we know from the
Oriental geographers of the tenth century, or the period covering the
better portion of the poet’s life. It was in Tabaran that Al-Ghazali was
buried, and there he must have had his home during the closing years of
his life.”[18]

Religious disputation must have been the very atmosphere of Tus.
Christians were numerous and the Moslem _Shiahs_ were almost as strong
as the orthodox. Some of their most celebrated writers and scholars, for
example Abu Jaʾfar Muhammed, were born at Tus; and Ibn Abi Hatim, one
of the earliest and most important critics of the science of Tradition,
died at Tus in 939. In spite of its learned men, however, Tus did not
have a high reputation, as we know from the following anecdote related
of Ibn-Habbariyya. He was asked by an enemy of Nizam Al-Mulk to compose
a satire on this ruler. “How can I attack a man to whose kindness I owe
everything I see in my house?” asked the poet. However, on being pressed,
he penned these lines:

    “What wonder is it that Nizam Al-Mulk should rule,
    And that Fate should be on his side?
    Fortune is like the water-wheel
    Which raises water from the well—
    None but _oxen_ can turn it!”

When the vizier was informed of this attack upon him, he merely remarked
that the poet had simply intended to allude to his origin—he came from
Tus in Khorasan, and, according to a popular saying, all the men of Tus
were oxen (one would say asses, nowadays).

“The people of Khorasan,” says Chenery, “were renowned for their
stinginess, and it is not surprising that the inhabitants of the mother
town were said to excel in it all the rest of the world. Witness the
story, related in Saʾadi’s Gulistan, if I remember well, of the merchant
of Merv, who would not allow his son to eat cheese, but made him rub his
bread against the glass cover under which it was kept.”

To prove the stupidity of the Khorasanis to-day, Major P. M. Sykes[19]
tells a story of three Persians who met and were all praising their own
provinces. The Kermani said, “Kerman produces fruit of seven colours.”
The Shirazi continued, “The waters of Ruknabad issue from the very rock.”
But the poor Khorasani could only say, “From Khorasan come all the fools
like myself.”

Yet Khorasan, in the words of Hujwiri, was that land “where the shadow
of God’s favour rested,” as regards the teaching of the Mystics. He
mentions nine leading Sufis who belong to Khorasan, and taught there
before Al-Ghazali’s day, all of them distinguished for the “sublimity of
their aspiration, the eloquence of their discourse, and the sagacity of
their intelligence.” He then goes on to say: “It would be difficult to
mention all the sheikhs of Khorasan. I have met three hundred in that
province alone who had such mystical endowments that a single man of them
would have been enough for the whole world. This is due to the fact that
the sun of love and the fortune of the Sufi Path is in the ascendant in
Khorasan.”[20]

In view of such statements it is clear that Al-Ghazali owed much to his
environment as well as to his own genius. He did not originate mysticism,
but used what his predecessors had already written on the subject. The
very chapter headings of _Kashf al-Mahjub_ are the same as those found in
Al-Ghazali’s books on mysticism.

According to Murtadha (who follows As-Subqi), Al-Ghazali’s full name was
Abu Hamid Mohammed bin Mohammed bin Mohammed at-Tusi al-Ghazali, and he
was born at Tus in the year of the Hegira 450 (A. D. 1058). In regard
to his name, it is related that others before him had the peculiarity
of the family name three times repeated. “Ibn-Kutaibah states that
Abu’l-Bakhtari’s name was Wahb b. Wahb b. Wahb, the same name thrice in
one continuation; and that similar to this among the names of the Persian
kings was that of Bahram b. Bahram b. Bahram; among the Talibis (the
descendants of Abu-Talib) that of Hasan b. Hasan b. Hasan, and among
the Ghassan that of al-Harith the junior b. al-Harith and the senior b.
al-Harith.”[21]

Concerning the spelling of his name, whether it should be spelled with
two z’s or with one, there has been long and strong dispute. Professor
Macdonald thinks the name should be spelt _Ghazzali_ and has given
his arguments in a special essay.[22] This spelling is given by Ibn
Khallikan in his biographical dictionary (d. A. D. 1282). But apparently,
according to the authority of As-Samʾani, the name is derived from
Ghazala, a village near Tus, and is not a professional noun, such as
are common among patronymics. Abu Saʾd ʾAbd al-Karim As-Samʾani was
born only two years after Al-Ghazali’s death, and wrote a famous book
of patronymics in eight volumes. He was, therefore, an expert in names
and genealogies, and we may well accept his authority for the spelling
of the name of the great _imam_, who was his own countryman. The sheikhs
of the Azhar University in Cairo _all_ follow this authority and write
_Al-Ghazali_.[23]

Some say that there had already been two scholars in the family, one
an elder Al-Ghazali, at whose tomb in the cemetery of Tus prayer was
answered. This was a paternal uncle of Ghazali’s father. The other was
a son of the same. The story is told, apparently on the authority of
Ghazali himself, that at the time of his father’s death he committed
his two boys, Mohammed and Ahmed, to the care of a trusted Sufi friend
for their education. He himself seems to have had unfulfilled desires
in regard to his own education and was determined that his boys should
have a better opportunity. So he left in trust what money he had for
the purpose with this friend, who proved faithful and taught and cared
for them until the money was all gone. Then he advised them to go to a
_madrasa_, where, according to Moslem custom, they would receive food for
their need and shelter. Ghazali used to tell the story of this experience
in after life, and would add the remark, “We became students for the sake
of something else than God, but _He_ was unwilling that it should be for
the sake of anything but Himself.” This instance doubtless throws light
on the motives for his studies and his great diligence. At the outset he
was in search rather of reputation and wealth through learning than of
piety.[24]

Of Al-Ghazali’s home life at Tus, and of his own family life afterwards,
we know next to nothing. His name Abu Hamid was doubtless given him
much later, and would seem to indicate that he had a son of that name
who probably died in infancy. We know that he married before he was
twenty and that at least three daughters survived him. Of his younger
brother, however, who died fifteen years after he did (1126), and was
buried at Kazvin, we know the following: He succeeded Al-Ghazali in the
professorial chair at the Nizamiyya School. Like him, he was a mystic
and preached his views with great eloquence as well as with a prolific
pen. We are told that he was a man of splendid appearance, and had the
gift of healing. So fond was he of public preaching that he neglected his
judicial studies. He wrote an abridgement of his brother’s great work,
and also a celebrated treatise on mysticism called _Minhaj al-albab_
(Path for Hearts), in which he deals with the advantages of poverty, and
advocates the wearing of a special garb by the dervishes. Another of his
books was in defense of music, called _Bawariq al-ilma_; but this was
considered frivolous by strict Moslems, although the Sufis used music to
produce the state of ecstasy.

Of Al-Ghazali’s mother we know nothing beyond the fact that she survived
her husband and lived to see both her sons famous at Bagdad, whither
apparently she accompanied or followed them. An interesting story is
told of how, when Abu Hamid was at the height of his fame at Bagdad, his
brother Ahmed not merely failed to show him proper respect, but acted
in such a manner as to discredit him in the eyes of the people. The
full account is worth giving. “He had a brother called Ahmed, surnamed
Jamal-ud-Din, or, as others say, Zain-ud-Din, who, notwithstanding the
high rank which his brother held, would not take part with him in the
prayers (_i. e._, would not recognize him as a man fitted to lead the
public prayers), even while thousands of the commonalty and nobility
arranged themselves in ranks behind him. So he complained to his mother
what he experienced at his brother’s hands, (saying) that it almost led
to people doubting him, seeing that his brother was celebrated for his
good conduct and piety, and he asked his mother to order him (Ahmed) to
treat him as other people did. He complained about this repeatedly, and
pressed his demand. His mother urged him (Ahmed) time and again to agree
to this, and he agreed on condition that he stand apart from the ranks.
The Imam accepted this condition, and when one of the appointed times of
prayer arrived, the Imam went to the Mosque, and the people followed him,
till, when the Imam began the prayer, and the people began it after him,
Jamal-ud-Din followed him in the prayer in the distance. And while they
were praying Jamal-ud-Din suddenly interrupted him. So this trial was
worse than the first; and when he was asked the reason (of his conduct)
he replied that it was impossible for him to take as his pattern an Imam
whose heart was full of blood, indicating by this expression the vileness
of one who took a share in the work of worldly men of learning.”[25]

Al-Ghazali must have begun his education at a very early age, and
his studies at Tus met with such success that he went to the larger
educational centre of Jurjan before the age of twenty, a distance of over
one hundred miles, and no inconsiderable journey at that time.

In Al-Ghazali’s autobiography we have a glimpse of how he himself
conceived the growth of a child in wisdom and stature. “The first sense
revealed to man,” he says, “is touch, by means of which he perceives a
certain group of qualities—heat, cold, moist, dry. The sense of touch
does not perceive colours and forms, which are for it as though they did
not exist. Next comes the sense of sight, which makes him acquainted
with colours and forms; that is to say, with that which occupies the
highest rank in the world of sensation. The sense of hearing succeeds,
and then the senses of smell and taste. When the human being can
elevate himself above the world of sense, towards the age of seven, he
receives the faculty of discrimination; he enters then upon a new phase
of existence and can experience, thanks to this faculty, impressions,
superior to those of the senses, which do not occur in the sphere of
sensation.”

Al-Ghazali must have been an early riser from his youth. In his
“Beginner’s Guide to Religion and Morals” (Al Badayet) he writes: “When
you awaken from sleep, endeavour to arise before early dawn, and may the
first thing that enters your heart and your tongue be the remembrance of
God Most High, saying, ‘Thanks be to God who hath given us life after the
death of sleep. To Him do we return. He hath awakened us and awakened all
nature. The greatness and the power belong to God; the majesty and the
dominion to the Lord of the worlds. He hath awakened us to the religion
of Islam and the testimony of His unity, and the religion of His Prophet
Mohammed and the sect of our father Abraham, who was a _Hanif_ and a
Moslem, and not a polytheist. O God, I ask Thee that Thou wouldst this
day send me all good and deliver me from all evil. By Thee, O God, do
we arise from sleep, and by Thee do we reach the even-tide. In Thee
do we live and die and to Thee do we return.’ And when you put on your
garments, remember that God desires you to cover your nakedness with them
and to show forth God’s beauty to those around you.”

In another place in the same little volume he again inculcates early
rising by saying: “Know that the night and the day consist of twenty-four
hours. Let therefore your sleep during the night and day be not more than
eight hours; for it will suffice you to think after you have lived sixty
years that you have lost twenty years of it solely in sleep.”

He probably began to read even before the age of seven, for we find
that his studies at Tus, and afterwards at Jurjan, apparently included
not only religious science but also a thorough knowledge of Persian
and Arabic. Of his religious studies we will speak later. He himself
tells us that the philosophical sciences taught included “mathematics,
logic, physics, metaphysics, politics, and moral philosophy.” And
although he does not speak in his Confessions of his earliest studies,
what he says in regard to mathematics throws a flood of light on his
youthful scepticism. He says, “Mathematics comprises the knowledge of
calculation, geometry, and cosmography: it has no connection with the
religious sciences, and proves nothing for or against religion; it rests
on a foundation of proofs which, once known and understood, cannot be
refuted. Mathematics tend, however, to produce two bad results. The first
is this: Whoever studies this science admires the subtlety and clearness
of its proofs. His confidence in philosophy increases, and he thinks that
all its departments are capable of the same clearness and solidity of
proofs as mathematics. But when he hears people speak of the unbelief and
impiety of mathematicians, of their professed disregard for the divine
Law, which is notorious, it is true that, out of regard for authority, he
echoes these accusations, but he says to himself at the same time that,
if there was truth in religion, it would not have escaped those who have
displayed so much keenness of intellect in the study of mathematics.”

Next, when he becomes aware of the unbelief and rejection of religion
on the part of these learned men, he concludes that to reject religion
is reasonable. “How many of such men gone astray I have met, whose sole
argument was that just mentioned!” (p. 28).

Not only mathematics but astronomy and other sciences were then in
alleged conflict with the facts of revelation. Al-Ghazali must have felt
this very keenly, for he says: “The ignorant Moslem thinks the best way
to defend religion is by rejecting all the exact sciences. Accusing
their professors of being astray, he rejects their theories of the
eclipses of the sun and moon, and condemns them in the name of religion.
These accusations are carried far and wide, they reach the ears of the
philosopher who knows that these theories rest on infallible proofs;
far from losing confidence in them, he believes, on the contrary, that
Islam has ignorance and the denial of scientific proofs for its basis,
and his devotion to philosophy increases with his hatred to religion. It
is therefore a great injury to religion to suppose that the defense of
Islam involves the condemnation of the exact sciences. The religious law
contains nothing which approves them or condemns them, and in their turn
they make no attack on religion. The words of the Prophet: ‘The sun and
moon are two signs of the power of God; they are not eclipsed for the
birth or the death of any one; when you see these signs take refuge in
prayer, and invoke the name of God’—these words I say, do not in any way
condemn the astronomical calculations which define the orbits of these
two bodies, their conjunction and opposition according to particular
laws.”[26] We must remember in this connection that it was Omar Khayyam,
the poet astronomer, who at this very time was leading many into
scepticism.

After a knowledge of Arabic grammar, and memorizing the Koran, the
diligent student would take up its critical and devotional study.
Al-Ghazali’s teachers undoubtedly emphasized, as he did himself, the
importance of correct reading of the sacred volume. In one of the most
beautiful passages in his _Ihya_, Al-Ghazali himself notes the following
points: The reader must be clean outwardly, and respect the book with
outward reverence. He must read the proper quantity. He quotes with
approval the practice of Saʾad and Othman, that the Koran should be read
through once a week. One should use chanting (_tartil_), for this is
helpful to the memory, and makes us read slowly, and rapid reading is
not approved. One should read it with weeping, _i. e._, sorrow for sins.
One should give the proper responses in the proper places. One should
use the opening prayer before beginning to read. It may be read secretly
or aloud. It must be read beautifully—according to the Tradition: “Adorn
the Koran by the sweetness of your voice;” or another Tradition: “He who
does not sing the Koran is not of our religion.” One day when the Prophet
heard Abu Musa reading the Koran he said: “Verily, to this reader God has
given the voice of David when he wrote the Psalms.”

We may believe that Yusuf Nassaj, his first teacher, who was a mystic, as
well as, later, the Imam al-Haramain, laid considerable emphasis on the
points here mentioned. The atmosphere in which Al-Ghazali was educated,
we must never forget, was that of mysticism.

The study of the Koran was followed by that of the Traditions, of which
the standard collections were already in circulation. After this, a
youth in Al-Ghazali’s day would begin the study of _Fiqh_, or Moslem
jurisprudence. We know from the contents of the standard works on this
subject, written before Al-Ghazali’s time, and later by himself, what
engrossed the attention in the schools of Tus and Jurjan.[27] His first
lesson would be on ceremonial purity by the use of ablution, the bath,
the tooth-pick and the various circumstances of legal defilement when
_ghasl_ or complete ablution is prescribed; of the ailments of women
and the duration of pregnancy. Then came the second part of the book
on prayer, its occasions, conditions, and requirements, including the
four things in which the prayer of a woman differs from that of a man.
He would learn all about the poor-rate (_zakat_), about fasting and
pilgrimage, about the laws of barter and sale and debt; about inheritance
and wills—a most difficult and complicated subject. Then the pupil would
pass on to marriage and divorce, a very large subject, and one on which
Moslem law books show no reserve, and leave no detail unmentioned. Then
would follow the laws in regard to crime and violence, Holy War, and the
ritual of sacrifice at the Great Feast. The last three chapters of books
on _Fiqh_ generally deal with oaths, evidence, and the manumission of
slaves.[28]

From his youth up Al-Ghazali belonged to the Shafiʾ School, one of the
four orthodox systems of jurisprudence. The Imam ash-Shafiiʾ, whose tomb
at Cairo was afterwards visited by Al-Ghazali, and is still a place of
pilgrimage, died in A. H. 204. He chose the _via media_ between the
slavery of tradition and the freedom of logic and deduction in Moslem
law. According to Macdonald, “Ash-Shafiʾi was without question one of
the greatest figures in the history of law. Perhaps he had not the
originality and keenness of Abu Hanifa; but he had a balance of mind and
temper, a clear vision and full grasp of means and ends, that enabled
him to say what proved to be the last word in the matter. After him came
attempts to tear down; but they failed. The fabric of the Muslim canon
law stood firm.” The adherents of the school of Shafiiʾ now number some
sixty million persons, of whom about a half are in the Netherland Indies,
and the rest in Egypt, Syria, Hadramaut, Southern India, and Malaysia.
Among all of these Al-Ghazali the Shafiʾite naturally holds a place of
supreme honour.

An interesting story is told in connection with his studies under the
Imam Abu Nasr al-Ismaʾili. He took copious notes under this celebrated
teacher, but neglected to memorize what he had written. This seems to
have been a characteristic of his, according to Macdonald, because his
quotations are often exceedingly careless; and one of the charges
brought against him by his assailants afterwards was that he falsified
tradition. “On his way back to Tus from Jurjan, however, he got his
lesson. He tells the story himself. Robbers fell upon him, stripped him,
and even carried off the bag with his manuscripts. This was more than
he could stand; he ran after them, clung to them though threatened with
death, and entreated the return of the notes—they were of no use to them.
Al-Ghazali had a certain quality of dry humour, and was evidently tickled
by the idea of these thieves studying law. The robber chief asked him
what were these notes of his. Said Al-Ghazali with great simplicity:
‘They are writings in that bag; I travelled for the sake of hearing them
and writing them down, and knowing the science in them.’ Thereat the
robber chief laughed consumedly, and said: ‘How can you profess to know
the science in them, when we have taken them from you and stripped you of
the knowledge, and there you are without any science?’ But he gave them
him back. ‘And,’ says Al-Ghazali, ‘this man was sent by God to teach me.’
So Al-Ghazali went back to Tus, and spent three years there committing
his notes to memory as a precaution against future robbers.”[29]

Shortly afterwards Al-Ghazali left Tus a second time to pursue his
studies at Nishapur under the most celebrated teacher of that period
in this great literary centre. Nishapur was situated forty-nine miles
west of Tus, and was captured by the Arabs in A. H. 31. Yakut, in his
geographical dictionary, says that of all the cities he had visited this
was the finest. It was in this city that Hamadhani wrote his four-hundred
_Maqamat_ and vanquished his great literary rival.

Other great names are connected with the city, among them Omar Khayyam
the poet, the Koran commentator Ahmed al-Thaʾlabi, and Maidani the author
of the well-known collection of Arabic proverbs.

The older name of the town or district was Abrashahr. The importance of
the place under the Sasanians was in part religious; one of the three
holiest fire temples was in its neighbourhood. Nishapur under the Moslems
contained a large Arab element; it became the capital of Khorasan, and
greatly increased in prosperity, under the almost independent princes
of the house of Tahir (A. D. 820-873). Istakhri describes it as a
well-fortified town, a league square, with a great export of cotton
goods and raw silk. In the decline of the empire the city had much to
suffer from the Turkomans, whose raids have in modern times destroyed
the prosperity of this whole region. In 1153 it was utterly ruined by
the Ghuzz Turkomans, but soon rose again, because, as Yakut remarks, its
position gave it command of the entire caravan trade with the East. It
was taken and razed to the ground by Mongols in 1221, but a century later
Ibn Batuta found the city again flourishing, with four colleges, numerous
students, and an export of silk-stuffs to India. Nishapur was famous for
its fruits and gardens which gave it the epithet of “little Damascus.”

We have an interesting portrait of Al-Ghazali’s chief teacher while he
was at Nishapur,—Abul-Maʾali ʿAbdal-Malik Al-Juwaini Imam al-Haramain. He
was born at Bushtaniqan, near Nishapur, on the twelfth of February, 1028,
and was one of the most learned and celebrated teachers of Moslem law in
his day. “On the death of his father, Abu Muhammed ʿAbdallah ibn Yusuf,
who was a teacher in the latter town, he took his place, though barely
twenty years of age.” But this was a time of literary prodigies due to
precocious talent and prodigious power of memory. “To complete his own
studies, and to make the sacred pilgrimage, he went to Bagdad and thence
to the two holy cities, Mecca and Medina, where he taught for four years;
hence his surname, which signifies ‘the teacher of the two holy places.’
When he returned to Nishapur, Nizam Al-Mulk founded a school for him, in
which he gave courses of lessons till his death, which overtook him on
the twentieth of August, 1085, while on a visit to his native village,
whither he had gone in the hope of recovering from an illness. Along
with his professorial duties, he had discharged those of a preacher. At
Nishapur he held gatherings every Friday, at which he preached sermons,
and presided over discussions on various doctrinal points: to these
occupations he added that of managing the _waqfs_, or landed property
devoted to the support of pious undertakings. For more than thirty years
he continued in undisputed possession of these various posts. When he
died, the mourning was general; the great pulpit of the Mosque from which
he had delivered his sermons was broken up, and his pupils, to the number
of four hundred and one, destroyed their pens and ink-horns, and gave up
their studies for a year.”[30] It is certain that Al-Ghazali sat at his
feet as a learner, both at Nishapur and Bagdad, and we may imagine that
he had a part also in the general mourning at the death of the Imam,
the manuscript of whose masterpiece, _Nihayat al-Matlab_ (Finality of
Inquiry), is still preserved in Cairo in the Sultania Library.

At Nishapur, Al-Ghazali was one of the favourite pupils of this Imam, and
here his studies were of the broadest, embracing theology, dialectics,
philosophy and logic. He was a teacher as well as a student, for we are
told that he would “read to his fellow students and teach them, until in
a short time he became infirm and weak.” Under the double task his health
failed, but he did not give up his studies. The Imam once said of him,
and two other notable pupils: “Al-Ghazali is a sea to drown in, Al-Kiya
is a tearing lion, and Al-Khawafi is a burning fire.” Another saying of
his about the same three was: “Whenever they contend together, the proof
belongs to Al-Khawafi, the warlike attacks to Al-Ghazali, and clearness
to Al-Kiya.” To this time of his life belongs the remark also, made by
some one unnamed, “The youth Al-Ghazali showed externally a vain-glorious
disposition, but underneath there was something that when it did appear
showed graceful expression and delicate allusion, soundness of attention,
and strength of character.”

“I cannot ascertain,” says Macdonald in speaking of this period of
Al-Ghazali’s life, “whether while he was still at Nishapur he touched
those depths of scepticism of which he speaks in the _Munqidh_. They must
certainly have been reached some time before the year A. H. 484, and
must have been the outcome of a long drift of development; but probably
so long as he was under the influence of the Imam-al-Haramain, a devout
Sufi, he would be held more or less fast to the old faith.”

Of these struggles of his soul in an age of doubt and how he found relief
the next chapter will tell us.




III

Teaching, Conversion, and Retirement

    “Al-Ghazali is one of the deepest thinkers, greatest
    theologians and profoundest moralists of Islam. In all
    Muhamadan lands he is celebrated both as an apologist of
    orthodoxy and a warm advocate of Sufi mysticism. Intimately
    acquainted with all the learning of his time, he was not only
    one of the numerous Oriental philosophers who traverse every
    sphere of intellectual activity, but one of those rarer minds
    whose originality is not crushed by their learning. He was
    imbued with a sacred enthusiasm for the triumph of his faith,
    and his whole life was dedicated to one purpose, the defense of
    Islam.”

                      —_“Mystics and Saints of Islam,” Claud Field._


III

TEACHING, CONVERSION, AND RETIREMENT

With the death of the Imam in A. H. 478 a great change came into the life
of Al-Ghazali. He left Nishapur to seek his fortune and it brought him to
the camp court of the great Vizier Nizam Al-Mulk. Here Al-Ghazali sought
advancement and the honours of learning.

The camp court was the travelling capital of the Seljuk Sultans. This
imperial camp was laid out into squares and streets. We read how in a few
hours a city, as if built by enchantment, would rise on the uninhabited
plain. The camp exhibited a motley collection of tents and dwellings and
palm-leaf huts. The only regular part of the encampment were the streets
of shops, each of which was constructed in the manner of a booth at an
English fair. Moore gives us the picture in these words:

    “Whose are the gilded tents that crowd the way,
    Where all was waste and silent yesterday?
    This City of War, which, in a few short hours,
    Hath sprung up here, as if the magic powers
    Of him who, in the twinkling of a star,
    Built the high pillar’d halls of Chilminar,
    Had conjured up, far as the eye can see,
    This world of tents and domes and sun-bright armoury.—
    Princely pavilions, screen’d by many a fold
    Of crimson cloth, and topp’d with balls of gold;—
    Steeds, with their housings of rich silver spun,
    And camels, tufted o’er with Yemen’s shells,
    Shaking in every breeze their light-toned bells.”[31]

As for Nizam Al-Mulk we have an interesting autobiography which he wrote
and left as a memorial for future statesmen. (It is quoted in Mirkhond’s
“History of the Assassins.”) “One of the greatest of the wise men of
Khorasan,” says he, “was the Imam Mowaffak of Nishapur, a man highly
honoured and reverenced,—may God rejoice his soul; his illustrious years
exceeded eighty-five, and it was the universal belief that every boy who
read the Koran or studied the traditions in his presence would assuredly
attain to honour and happiness. For this cause did my father send me from
Tus to Nishapur with Abd-us-Samad, the doctor of law, that I might employ
myself in study and learning under the guidance of that illustrious
teacher. Towards me he ever turned an eye of favour and kindness, and
as his pupil I felt for him extreme affection and devotion, so that I
passed four years in his service. When I first came there, I found two
other pupils of mine own age newly arrived—Hakim Omar Khayyam, and the
ill-fated Ibn Sabbah, founder of the sect of the Assassins. Both were
endowed with sharpness of wit and the highest natural powers; and we
three formed a close friendship together. When the Imam rose from his
lectures, they used to join me, and we repeated to each other the lessons
we had heard. Now Omar was a native of Nishapur, while Hasan Ibn Sabbah’s
father was one Ali, a man of austere life and practice but heretical in
his creed and doctrine. One day Hasan said to me and to Khayyam: ‘It is
a universal belief that the pupils of the Imam Mowaffak will attain to
fortune. Now, even if we all do not attain thereto, without doubt one of
us will; what then shall be our mutual pledge and bond?’ We answered:
‘Be it what you please.’ ‘Well,’ he said, ‘let us make a vow, that to
whomsoever this fortune falls, he shall share it equally with the rest,
and reserve no preëminence for himself.’ ‘Be it so,’ we both replied, and
on these terms we mutually pledged our words. Years rolled on, and I went
from Khorasan to Transoxiana, and wandered to Ghazni and Kabul; and when
I returned I was invested with office, and rose to be administrator of
affairs during the Sultanate of Sultan Alp Arslan.”

After his education at Nishapur Nizam Al-Mulk served Alp Arslan, the
successor of Togrul Bey, and for more than twenty years the burden of
the empire of the Seljuks rested on his shoulders. When Alp Arslan
died in 465 Malek Shah succeeded him and from that time until his
assassination, on the tenth of Ramadan, 485, Nizam Al-Mulk was the
greatest man in the empire and its real ruler. He was a friend of
learning and letters and established colleges in many centres.

In A. H. 484, Al-Ghazali gained high fame at court and was appointed by
Nizam Al-Mulk to teach in the _Madrasa_ at Bagdad, the capital of the
whole of Eastern Islam.

We have an interesting picture of the city of Bagdad about this time
from the pen of Rabbi Benjamin, of Tudela, who visited the city some
years after Al-Ghazali’s death (1160). He says: “The circumference of
the city of Bagdad measures three miles; the country in which it is
situated is rich in palm-trees, gardens and orchards, so that nothing
equals it in Mesopotamia; merchants of all countries resort thither for
purposes of trade, and it contains many wise philosophers well skilled
in sciences, and magicians proficient in all sorts of witchcraft. The
palace of the Caliph at Bagdad is three miles in extent. It contains a
large park of all sorts of trees, both useful and ornamental, and all
sorts of beasts, as well as a pond of water led thither from the river
Tigris; and whenever the Caliph desires to enjoy himself and to sport
and to carouse, birds, beasts and fishes are prepared for him and for
his councillors, whom he invites to his palace.” He gives us a glimpse
of what went on behind the walls of these royal palaces when he says:
“All the brothers and other members of the Caliph’s family are accustomed
to kiss his garments, and every one of them possesses a palace within
that of the Caliph; but they are all fettered by chains of iron, and
a special officer is appointed over every household to prevent their
rising in rebellion against the great king. These measures are enacted
in consequence of an occurrence which took place some time ago, and upon
which occasion the brothers rebelled and elected a king among themselves.
To prevent this in future, it was decreed that all the members of the
Caliph’s family should be chained, in order to prevent their rebellious
intentions. Every one of them, however, resides in his palace, is there
much honoured, and they possess villages and towns, the rents of which
are collected for them by their stewards; they eat and drink, and lead a
merry life.

“The palace of the great king contains large buildings, pillars of
gold and silver, and treasures of precious stones. The Caliph leaves
his palace but once every year, viz., at the time of the feast called
Ramadan. Upon this occasion many visitors assemble from distant parts,
in order to have an opportunity of beholding his countenance. He then
bestrides the royal mule, dressed in kingly robes, which are composed
of gold and silver cloth. On his head he wears a turban, ornamented
with precious stones of inestimable value; but over this turban is
thrown a black veil, as a sign of humility, and as much as to say: ‘See,
all this worldly honour will be converted into darkness on the day of
death.’ He is accompanied by a numerous retinue of Mohammedan nobles,
arrayed in rich dresses, and riding upon horses; princes of Arabia, of
Media, of Persia, and even of Thibet, a country distant three months’
journey from Arabia. This procession goes from the Palace to the Mosque
at the Basra gate, which is the Metropolitan Mosque. All those who walk
in procession are dressed in silk and purple, both men and women. The
streets and squares are enlivened by singing, rejoicings, and by parties
who dance before the great king, called Caliph. He is loudly saluted by
the assembled crowd, who cry, ‘Blessed art thou, our lord and king.’ He
thereupon kisses his garment, and by holding it in his hand, acknowledges
and returns the compliment. The procession moves on into the court of the
Mosque, where the Caliph mounts a wooden pulpit, and expounds their law
unto them. The learned Mohammedans rise, pray for him, and praise his
great kindness and piety; upon which the whole assembly answer, ‘Amen.’
He then pronounces his blessing and kills a camel, which is led thither
for that purpose, and this is their offering, which is distributed to
the nobles. These send portions of it to their friends, who are eager to
taste of the meat killed by the hands of their holy king, and are much
rejoiced therewith. He then leaves the Mosque, and returns alone to his
Palace along the banks of the Tigris, the noble Mohammedans accompanying
him in boats until he enters his buildings. He never returns by the way
he came, and the path on the bank of the river is carefully guarded all
the year around, so as to prevent any one treading in his footsteps. The
Caliph never leaves his palace again for a whole year.

“He is a pious and benevolent man, and has erected buildings on the other
side of the river, on the banks of an arm of the Euphrates which runs on
one side of the city. These buildings include many large houses, streets,
and hostelries for the sick poor, who resort thither in order to be
cured. There are about sixty medical warehouses here, all well provided
from the king’s stores with spices and other necessaries; and every
patient who claims assistance is fed at the king’s expense until his cure
is completed. There is further the large building called Dar-ul-Marastan
(the abode of the insane), in which are locked up all those insane
persons who are met with, particularly during the hot season, every one
of whom is secured by iron chains until his reason returns, when he is
allowed to return to his home.”

We may add what the poet, Al-Hamadhani, a contemporary, tells us of the
luxuries of the table at Bagdad: “We found ourselves among a company who
were passing their time amid bunches of myrtle twigs, and bouquets of
roses, broached wine vats and the sound of the flute and the lute. We
approached them and they advanced to receive us. Then we clave to a table
whose vessels were filled, whose gardens were in flower, and whose dishes
were arranged in rows with viands of various hues; opposite a dish of
something intensely black was something exceedingly white, and against
something very red was arranged something very yellow.” And in another
place: “I was in Bagdad in a famine year, and so I approached a company,
united like the Pleiades, in order to ask something of them. Now there
was among them a youth with a lisp in his tongue and a space between his
front teeth. He asked: ‘What is thy affair?’ I replied: ‘Two conditions
in which a man prospers not: that of a beggar harassed by hunger, and
that of an exile to whom return is impossible.’ The boy then said: ‘Which
of the two breaches dost thou wish stopped first?’ I answered: ‘Hunger,
for it has become extreme with me.’ He said: ‘What sayest thou to a white
cake on a clean table, picked herbs with very sour vinegar, fine date
wine with pungent mustard, roast meat ranged on a skewer with a little
salt, placed now before thee by one who will not put thee off with a
promise nor torture thee with delay, and who will afterwards follow it up
with golden goblets of the juice of grape? Is that preferable to thee,
or a large company, full cups, variety of dessert, spread carpets,
brilliant lights, and a skilful minstrel with the eye and neck of a
gazelle?’”

From all this we can imagine what Al-Ghazali enjoyed when he went to dine
with the Nizam Al-Mulk or other men of wealth and there was _no_ famine
in Bagdad!

The Nizamiyya College which Al-Ghazali attended and in which he was one
of the leading lecturers at two periods of his life, was built on the
eastern river bank of the Tigris, near the Bridge of Boats and close to
the wharf and the large market-place. The college was founded in A. D.
1065, being especially established for the teaching of Shafiʾite law.
Close to the college was another college called the Bahaiyah and the
hospital Maristan Tutushi.

The traveller, Ibn Jubayr, attended prayers in the Nizamiyya on the first
Friday after his arrival in Bagdad, in the year 581 (A. D. 1185), and he
describes it as the most splendid of the thirty and odd colleges which
then adorned the City of East Bagdad.... Ibn Jubayr further reports that
in his day the endowments derived from domains and rents belonging to
the college amply sufficed both to pay the stipends of professors and
to keep the building in good order, besides supplying an extra fund for
the sustenance of poor scholars. The _Suk_, or market of the Nizamiyya,
was one of the great thoroughfares of this quarter, and it is described
as lying adjacent to the “_Mashraʾah_” or wharf, which proves that the
college must have stood near the Tigris bank.[32] ... Writing a dozen
years later than Ibn Batuta, Hamd-Allah, the Persian historian, briefly
alludes to the Nizamiyya, which he calls “the mother of the Madrasahs”
in Bagdad. This proves that down to the middle of the fourteenth century
A. D. the college was still standing, though at the present time all
vestiges of it have disappeared, as indeed appears already to have been
the case in the middle of the last century, for Niebuhr found no traces
of the Nizamiyya to describe in his painstaking account of the ruins in
the city of Caliphs, as these still existed in the time of his visit.

It was here, at the Nizamiyya School, that Al-Ghazali first embarked
on his career as an independent teacher. His lectures drew crowds. He
gave _fatwas_, or legal opinions, on matters of the law,[33] he wrote
books, he preached in the mosque, and was a leader of the people. Then
suddenly in the midst of all this prosperity a great change came over
him. He seemed to be attacked by a mysterious disease. His speech became
hampered, his appetite failed, and his physicians said the malady was due
to mental unrest. He suddenly left Bagdad in the month of Dhu-l-Qada,
488, appointed his brother Ahmed to teach in his place, and abandoned
all his property, except so much as was necessary for his own support and
that of his children.

This sudden retirement from active life and academic honour was
unintelligible to the theologians of his days. They looked upon it as
a calamity for Islam. Some interpreted it as fear of the Government, a
flight from responsibility, but the real reason of his renunciation he
himself tells us in his “Confessions.” This book reveals the story of his
spiritual experiences from his youth up to his fiftieth year.

He says: “Know then, my brother (may God direct you in the right
way), that the diversity in beliefs and religions, and the variety of
doctrines and sects which divide men, are like a deep ocean strewn with
shipwrecks, from which very few escape safe and sound. Each sect, it is
true, believes itself in possession of the truth and of salvation; ‘each
party,’ as the Koran saith, ‘rejoices in its own creed’; but as the chief
of apostles, whose word is always truthful, has told us, ‘My people will
be divided into more than seventy sects of whom only one will be saved.’
This prediction, like all others of the Prophet, must be fulfilled.

“From the period of adolescence, that is to say, previous to reaching
my twentieth year to the present time when I have passed my fiftieth, I
have ventured into this vast ocean; I have interrogated the beliefs of
each sect and scrutinized the mysteries of each doctrine, in order to
disentangle truth from error and orthodoxy from heresy. I have never met
one who maintained the hidden meaning of the Koran without investigating
the nature of his belief, nor a partisan of its exterior sense without
inquiring into the results of his doctrine. There is no philosopher whose
system I have not fathomed, nor theologian the intricacies of whose
doctrine I have not followed out.

“Sufism has no secrets into which I have not penetrated; the devout
adorer of Deity has revealed to me the aim of his austerities; the
atheist has not been able to conceal from me the real reason of his
unbelief. The thirst for knowledge was innate in me from my early age;
it was like a second nature implanted by God, without any will on my
part. No sooner had I emerged from boyhood than I had already broken the
fetters of tradition and freed myself from hereditary beliefs.

“Having noticed how easily the children of Christians become Christians,
and the children of Moslems embrace Islam, and remembering also the
traditional saying ascribed to the Prophet: ‘Every child has in him the
germ of Islam, then his parents make him Jew, Christian, or Zoroastrian,’
I was moved by a keen desire to learn what was this innate disposition
in the child, the nature of the accidental beliefs imposed on him by the
authority of his parents and his masters, and finally the unreasoned
convictions which he derives from their instructions.”

Again he is full of doubts when he says: “Perhaps also Death is that
state [he is speaking of a possible state of being which will bear the
same relation to our present state as this does to the condition when
asleep], according to a saying of the Prince of Prophets: ‘Men are
asleep; when they die, they wake.’ Our present life in relation to the
future is perhaps only a dream, and man, once dead, will see things in
direct opposition to those now before his eyes.

“Such thoughts as these threatened to shake my reason, and I sought to
find an escape from them. But how? In order to disentangle the knot of
this difficulty, a proof was necessary. Now a proof must be based on
primary assumptions, and it was precisely these of which I was in doubt.
This unhappy state lasted about two months, during which I was not, it
is true, explicitly or by profession, _but morally and essentially a
thoroughgoing sceptic_.”

That Al-Ghazali was driven to scepticism must not surprise us. Schools
of free thinkers had been established fifty years earlier at Bagdad and
Busrah. Every Friday they gathered together. Some were rationalists, some
downright materialists. Not only philosophers but poets were the leaders
of these circles. Among them we must mention Abu’l ʾAla Al-Maʾarri, born
in 973 A. D. This blind poet is said to have written a Koran in imitation
of Mohammed, and when some one complained to him that although the book
was well written it did not make the same impression as the true Koran,
he replied: “Let it be read from the pulpit of the mosques for four
hundred years and then you will all be delighted with it.” His quatrains
rival those of Omar Al-Khayyam in their utter pessimism and rank
infidelity from the orthodox Moslem standpoint. For example, he writes:

    “Lo: there are many ways and many traps
      And many guides and which of them is Lord?
      For verily Mohammed has the sword
    And he may have the truth—perhaps? _perhaps?_

    Now _this_ religion happens to prevail
      Until by _that_ one it is overthrown,—
      Because men dare not live with men alone,
    But always with another fairy-tale.

    Religion is a charming girl, I say;
      But over this poor threshold will not pass,
      Because I can’t unveil her, and alas;
    The bridal gift I can’t afford to pay.”

Nor could this poet have had much reverence for the religion of Islam
when he wrote:

    “Where is the valiance of the folk who sing
      These valiant stories of the world to come?
      Which they describe, forsooth, as if it swung
    In air and anchored with a yard of string.”

    ...

    “Two merchantmen decided they would battle,
      To prove at last who sold the finest wares;
      And while Mohammed shrieked his call to prayers,
    The true Messiah waved his wooden rattle.”

As in the nineteenth century for Christianity, so in the eleventh century
for Islam, the struggle between science and orthodoxy waged fiercely. The
rationalistic school of the Muʾtazilites still exercised great influence
while the literalists and the blind followers of traditional Islam were
often more distinguished for Pharisaism than piety.

We need only turn to the “Maqamat” of Al-Hamadhani to know what the
sceptic of that day thought of the public religious services.

“So I slipped away from my companions,” says his hero, “taking advantage
of the opportunity of joining in public prayers, and dreading, at the
same time, the loss of the caravan I was leaving. But I sought aid
against the difficulty of the desert through the blessing of prayer,
and, therefore, I went to the front row and stood up. The Imam went up
to the niche and recited the opening chapter of the Quran according to
the intonation of _Hamza_, in regard to using ‘_Madda_’ and ‘_Hamza_,’
while I experienced disquieting grief at the thought of missing the
caravan, and of separation from the mount. Then he followed up the Surat
Al-Fatiha with Surat Al-Waqʾia while I suffered the fire of impatience
and tasked myself severely. I was roasting and grilling on the live coal
of rage. But, from what I knew of the savage fanaticism of the people
of that place, if prayers were cut short of the final salutation, there
was no alternative but silence and endurance, or speech and the grave!
So I remained standing thus on the foot of necessity till the end of the
chapter. I had now despaired of the caravan and given up all hope of the
supplies and the mount. He next bent his back for the two prostrations
with such humility and emotion, the like of which I had never seen
before. Then he raised his hands and his head and said: ‘May God accept
the praise of him who praises Him,’ and remained standing till I doubted
not but that he had fallen asleep. Then he placed his right hand on the
ground, put his forehead on the earth and pressed his face thereto. I
raised my head to look for an opportunity to slip away, but I perceived
no opening in the rows, so I re-addressed myself to prayer until he
repeated the _Takbir_ for the sitting posture. Then he stood up for the
second prostration, recited the Suras of Al-Fatiha and Al-Qaria with an
intonation which occupied the duration of the Last Day and well-nigh
exhausted the spirits of the congregation. Now, when he had finished
his two prostrations and proceeded to wag his jaws to pronounce the
testimony to God’s unity, and to turn his face to the right and to the
left for the final salutation, I said: ‘Now God has made escape easy, and
deliverance is nigh’; but a man stood up and said: ‘Whosoever of you
loves the companions of the Moslem community let him lend me his ears for
a moment.’”—Such was the impression made by the formalities of orthodoxy!

Al-Ghazali found no help for his doubts among these scholastic
theologians nor has any Moslem since his day. Professor Macdonald tells
us why. “Grant the theologians their premises, and they could argue; deny
them, and there was no common ground on which to meet. Their science had
been founded by Al-Ashʾari to meet the Muʾtazilites; it had done that
victoriously, but could do no more. They could hold the faith against
heretics, expose their inconsistencies and weaknesses; but against the
sceptic they could do nothing. It is true that they had attempted to go
further back and meet the students of philosophy on their own ground, to
deal with substances and attributes and first principles generally; but
their efforts had been fruitless. They lacked the necessary knowledge of
the subject, had no scientific basis, and were constrained eventually to
fall back on authority.”[34]

“Nor did he find light in philosophy, although he thoroughly studied the
various systems of his day and refuted them. Religion is not merely of
the mind but of the heart; philosophy had its place but could satisfy
only the intellect and left the deepest longings of the soul unsatisfied.
Next he examined the teachings of the Taʾlimites, the contemporary
sect of the Ishmaelites founded by Hassan Ibn as Sabbah. Theirs was the
doctrine of an Imam or infallible spiritual guide and the sect found
large following. But Al-Ghazali, so far from being attracted by them,
wrote several books against them.”[35] No other path remained open for
the perplexed and sceptical seeker after God than the way of the mystics.
It was a return to the early teaching he received at Tus and Nishapur and
to the atmosphere of his native land which was for centuries steeped in
mysticism. Of this period of his life he was wont to say:

“When I wished to plunge into following the people and to drink of their
drink, I looked at my soul and I saw how much it was curtained in, so
I retired into solitude and busied myself with religious exercises for
forty days, and there was doled to me of knowledge I had not had purer
and finer than what I had known. Then I looked upon it, and lo, in it
was a legal element. So I returned to solitude and busied myself with
religious exercises for forty days, and there was doled to me other
knowledge, purer and finer than what had befallen me at first, and I
rejoiced in it. Then I looked upon it, and lo, in it was a speculative
element. So I returned to solitude a third time for forty days, and
there was doled to me other knowledge that is known (_i. e._, not simply
perceived, felt), and I did not attain to the people of the inward
sciences. So I know that writing on a surface from which something has
been erased is not like writing on a surface in its first purity and
cleanness, and I never separated myself from speculation except in a few
things.”

Who can read this and doubt his utter sincerity in the search for God and
for Truth?

He tells the rest of the story in his “Confessions”: “I saw that Sufism
consists in experiences rather than in definitions, and that what I was
lacking belonged to the domain, not of instruction but of ecstasy and
initiation.

“The researches to which I had devoted myself, the path which I had
traversed in studying religious and speculative branches of knowledge,
had given me a firm faith in three things—God, inspiration, and the Last
Judgment. These three fundamental articles of belief were confirmed
in me, not merely by definite arguments, but by a chain of causes,
circumstances, and proofs which it is impossible to recount. I saw that
one can only hope for salvation by devotion and the conquest of one’s
passions, a procedure which presupposes renouncement and detachment
from this world of falsehood in order to turn towards eternity and
meditation on God. Finally, I saw that the only condition of success was
to sacrifice honours and riches and to sever the ties and attachments of
worldly life.

“Coming seriously to consider my state, I found myself bound down on all
sides by these trammels. Examining my actions, the most fair-seeming
of which were my lecturing and professorial occupations, I found to my
surprise that I was engrossed in several studies of little value, and
profitless as regards my salvation. I probed the motives of my teaching
and found that, in place of being sincerely consecrated to God, it was
only actuated by a vain desire of honour and reputation. I perceived
that I was on the edge of an abyss, and that without an immediate
conversion I should be doomed to eternal fire. In these reflections
I spent a long time. Still a prey to uncertainty, one day I decided
to leave Bagdad and to give up everything; the next day I gave up my
resolution. I advanced one step and immediately relapsed. In the morning
I was sincerely resolved only to occupy myself with the future life;
in the evening a crowd of carnal thoughts assailed and dispersed my
resolutions. On the one side the world kept me bound to my post in the
chains of covetousness, on the other side the voice of religion cried to
me: ‘Up, Up, thy life is nearing its end, and thou hast a long journey to
make. All thy pretended knowledge is nought but falsehood and fantasy.
If thou dost not think now of thy salvation, when wilt thou think of it?
If thou dost not break thy chains to-day, when wilt thou break them?’
Then my resolve was strengthened, I wished to give up all and flee; but
the Tempter returning to the attack said: ‘You are suffering from a
transitory feeling; don’t give way to it, for it will soon pass. If you
obey it, if you give up this fine position, this honourable post exempt
from trouble and rivalry, this seat of authority safe from attack you
will regret it later on without being able to recover it.’

“Thus I remained, torn asunder by the opposite forces of earthly passions
and religious aspirations, for about six months from the month Rajab of
the year A. D. 1096. At the close of them my will yielded and I gave
myself up to destiny. God caused an impediment to chain my tongue and
prevented me from lecturing. Vainly I desired, in the interest of my
pupils, to go on with my teaching, but my mouth became dumb.

“The enfeeblement of my physical powers was such that the doctors
despairing of saving me, said: ‘The mischief is in the heart, and has
communicated itself to the whole organism; there is no hope unless the
cause of his grievous sadness be arrested.’

“Finally, conscious of my weakness and the prostration of my soul, I
took refuge in God as a man at the end of himself and without resources.
‘He who hears the wretched when they cry’ (Koran, xxviii. 63) deigned to
hear me; He made easy to me the sacrifice of honours, wealth, and family”
(“The Confessions,” pp. 42-45).

That his _conversion_ did not mean ethically all that the word means
in the Christian sense is evident from what immediately follows. He
dissembled: “I gave out publicly that I intended to make the pilgrimage
to Mecca, while I secretly resolved to go to Syria, not wishing that the
Caliph (may God magnify him) or my friends should know my intention of
settling in that country. I made all kinds of clever excuses for leaving
Bagdad with the fixed intention of not returning thither. The Imams of
Irak criticized me with one accord. Not one of them would admit that this
sacrifice had a religious motive, because they considered my position
as the highest attainable in the religious community. ‘Behold how far
their knowledge goes’ (Koran, liii. 31). All kinds of explanations of
my conduct were forthcoming. Those who were outside the limits of Irak
attributed it to the fear with which the Government inspired me. Those
who were on the spot and saw how the authorities wished to detain me,
their displeasure at my resolution and my refusal of their request, said
to themselves, ‘It is a calamity which one can only impute to a fate
which has befallen the Faithful and Learning.’

“At last I left Bagdad, giving up all my fortune. Only, as lands and
property in Irak can afford an endowment for pious purposes, I obtained a
legal authorization to preserve as much as was necessary for my support
and that of my children; for there is surely nothing more lawful in the
world than that a learned man should provide sufficient to support his
family. I then betook myself to Syria, where I remained for two years,
which I devoted to retirement, meditation, and devout exercises. I only
thought of self-improvement and discipline and of purification of the
heart by prayer in going through the forms of devotion which the Sufis
had taught me. I used to live a solitary life in the Mosque of Damascus,
and was in the habit of spending my days on the minaret after closing the
door behind me” (pp. 45-46).

When Al-Ghazali determined to abandon the world and set out as a pilgrim
he was only following the custom of his time. Not only religious men
but adventurers found in travel relief and recreation. The pious did
it, as they asserted, in imitation of Jesus, the Messiah, whose name
is often interpreted as meaning “one who travels constantly.” And the
worldly-minded often donned the garb of religious fakirs to satisfy their
desire for adventure and their ambition to see distant lands.

Because of facilities for travel by post and caravan routes, this period
seemed one of _wanderlust_ second to none. A scholar was not satisfied
unless he had seen the world of Islam. Of At-Tabrizi (A. D. 1030-1100),
one of the contemporaries of Al-Ghazali, who was also professor at the
Nizamiyya School, we read that when he desired to go on a journey for
literary purposes “he had no money wherewith to hire a horse, so he put
his book into a sack and started to walk the long journey from Persia to
Syria. The sweat on his back oozed through the material of his sack and
stained the precious manuscript, which was long preserved and shown to
visitors in one of the libraries of Bagdad.” The Persian poet Saʾadi was
left an orphan at an early age, went to Bagdad to attend the Nizamiyya
University course, made the Mecca pilgrimage several times over, acted,
out of charity, as a water-carrier in the markets of Jerusalem and the
Syrian towns, was taken prisoner by the Franks, and forced to work with
Jews at cleaning out the moats of Tripoli in Syria; he was ransomed by
an Aleppan, who gave him his daughter in marriage. He himself mentions
his visits to Kashgar in Turkestan, to Abyssinia, and Asia Minor. He even
travelled about India, passing through Afghanistan on his way.

[Illustration: Interior of the Great Mosque at Damascus. In the center
the _Mihrab_ showing the direction of prayer and to the right the Great
Pulpit.]

We have a picture of such a dervish (a dishonest one, however) in
Hamadhani’s forty-second _Maqamat_: “So I started wandering, as though I
was the Messiah, and I journeyed over Khorasan, its deserted and populous
parts, to Kirman, Sijistan, Jilan, Tabaristan, Oman, to Sind and Hind, to
Nubia and Egypt, Yemen, Hijaz, Mecca and al Taʾif. I roamed over deserts
and wastes, seeking warmth and the fire and taking shelter with the ass,
till both my cheeks were blackened. And thus I collected of anecdotes
and fables, witticisms and traditions, poems of the humorists, the
diversions of the frivolous, the fabrications of the lovesick, the saws
of the pseudo-philosophers, the tricks of the conjurors, the artifices
of the artful, the rare sayings of convivial companions, the fraud of
the astrologers, the finesse of quacks, the deception of the effeminate,
the guile of the cheats, the devilry of the fiends, such that the legal
decisions of al-Shaʿabi, the memory of al-Dabbi and the learning of
al-Kalbi would have fallen short of. And I solicited gifts and asked
for presents. I had recourse to influence and I begged. I eulogized
and satirized, till I acquired much property, got possession of Indian
swords and Yemen blades, fine coats of mail of Sabur and leathern shields
of Thibet, spears of al-Khatt and javelins of Barbary, excellent fleet
horses with short coats, Armenian mules, and Mirris asses, silk brocades
of Rum and woolen stuffs of Sus.”[36]

To the _honest_ traveller, like Al-Ghazali, however, it was not so easy a
life. Not only were there the hardships of travel and its loneliness, but
the asceticism of the beggar and the wayfarer. “And to such a pass did we
come,” says Hariri, “through assailing fortune and prostrating need,—that
we were shod with soreness, and fed on choking, and filled our bellies
with ache, and wrapped our entrails upon hunger, and anointed our eyes
with watching, and made pits our home, and deemed thorns a smooth bed,
and came to forget our saddles, and thought destroying death to be sweet
and the ordained day to be tardy.”

We may believe that so keen an observer as Al-Ghazali carried his
“_Baedeker_” with him on his travels. He was doubtless acquainted with
the chief geographical works of that period, some of which contained maps
and even illustrations. The most important work was that by Abu ʾAbdallah
al-Maqdisi, who spent a great part of his life travelling all over the
Moslem empire, with the possible exception of India and Spain. His book
was entitled: “The Best Classification for the Knowledge of Climates.” It
was written in A. D. 985. Another work of a contemporary of Al-Ghazali,
Abu ʾUbaid al-Bakri of Cordova, was a general geography of all the roads
and provinces of the Moslem world.

Although we have no details of Al-Ghazali’s wanderings we can at least
follow him on his journeys and learn something of the places he visited
and their condition in his day. The course of his travels seems to have
been from Bagdad to Damascus, a journey of nearly five hundred miles,
from Damascus to Jerusalem and Hebron, thence on to the birthplace of the
Prophet at Mecca and his tomb at Medina and back over a thousand miles
more of caravan travel.

All through this period of Al-Ghazali’s life Damascus was experiencing
the storm and stress of war. Shortly before his time the city was taken
by the Karmatians and much of it was destroyed by fire. There were
frequent changes of governors, uprisings and riots. In 1068 the great
Mosque was set on fire. In 1076 the Seljuk generals seized the city,
built anew the citadel and other buildings, among them a famous hospital.
This was about fifteen years before Al-Ghazali’s arrival there from
Bagdad.

The great Ummayad Mosque of Damascus was said to be the grandest of all
Mohammedan buildings. There was praying space for 20,000 men; and it is
said to have taken the whole revenue of Syria for forty-seven years, not
counting eighteen shiploads of gold and silver from Cyprus to complete
the building. “When the wondrous work was finished, the Caliph would
not look at the accounts brought to him on eighteen laden mules, but
ordered that they should be burned and thus addressed the crowd: ‘Men of
Damascus, you possess four glories above other people; you are proud of
your water, your air, your fruits, your baths; your mosque shall be your
fifth glory.’”

Like other famous places of Moslem worship, this mosque was once the
site of a Christian church, dedicated to St. John the Baptist, to whom
there is still an imposing shrine. For some years the building was shared
between Christians and Mohammedans, but in A. D. 708 the Christians were
driven out. To this day one of the three minarets is called by the name
of _ʾIsa_ (Jesus), and above a gate, long since closed, is the Greek
inscription, “THY KINGDOM, O CHRIST, IS AN EVERLASTING KINGDOM, AND THY
DOMINION ENDURETH THROUGHOUT ALL GENERATIONS.”

Al-Ghazali spent many hours for many years under the shadow of this
great building, and it was in the minaret of Jesus that he had long
meditations. The minaret of Jesus, according to H. Saladin,[37] was built
in the eleventh century, shortly before the time of Al-Ghazali’s visit.
Did he ever find or understand the inscription on the gate and meditate
on that Prophet whose kingdom has no end and no frontier?




IV

Wanderings, Later Years, and Death

    “Then came the immediate breaking up of the Seljukian Empire
    into a number of independent principalities. Syria, Palestine,
    and all Asia Minor, were partitioned among a dozen different
    Turkish Emirs. Khorasan and Irak became the scene of a fierce
    civil war, extending over several years, between two sons of
    Malek Shah, Barkiaroc and Muhammed. Drought was added to the
    horrors of war; the people perished by thousands of famine; the
    incessant marching and counter-marching of the hostile armies
    destroyed the remnant of food which had survived the want of
    rain. To crown all, from the borders of Christendom a fresh
    scourge was beheld preparing for Islam. The hosts of the Red
    Cross passed the Bosphorus, and fought their way knee-deep in
    blood to the walls of Jerusalem. The capture of the Holy City
    struck like the point of a poisoned dagger to the heart of
    every true Moslem.”

                            —_“Islam under the Khalifs of Baghdad,”
                                           by Robert Durie Osborn._


IV

WANDERINGS, LATER YEARS, AND DEATH

The chronology of Al-Ghazali’s life was a puzzle even to those who wrote
only a century after his death. There seems great uncertainty not only as
to the time of his various journeyings but as to their order, and there
is dispute even regarding the places he visited. We know that the date
of his conversion was A. H. 488 (A. D. 1095), when he was thirty-eight
years old, and that shortly after this he went into exile. In A. H.
498 (A. D. 1104) he is said to have returned to active life, and to
have spent two years in retirement in Syria. The other dates are quite
uncertain. Following the best authorities at our disposal, especially his
own “Confessions,” we continue the story where we left off in the last
chapter.[38]

“From Damascus,” says Al-Ghazali, “I proceeded to Jerusalem, and every
day secluded myself in the Sanctuary of the Rock. After that I felt
a desire to accomplish the Pilgrimage, and to receive a full effusion
of grace by visiting Mecca, Medina, and the Tomb of the Prophet. After
visiting the shrine of the Friend of God (Abraham), I went to the Hejaz.
Finally, the longings of my heart and the prayers of my children brought
me back to my country, although I was so firmly resolved at first never
to revisit it. At any rate, I meant, if I did return, to live there
solitary and in religious meditation; but events, family care, and
vicissitudes of life changed my resolutions and troubled my meditative
calm. However irregular the intervals which I could give to devotional
ecstasy, my confidence in it did not diminish; and the more I was
diverted by hindrances, the more steadfastly I returned to it. Ten years
passed in this manner.”

According to this account his pilgrimage to Jerusalem and Hebron, to
Medina and Mecca, was part of one itinerary; it also is the natural
route of travel from Bagdad to the birthplace of Islam. The statement
made by some authorities that he first remained ten years at Damascus is
therefore probably inaccurate. If we are to believe al-Isnawi, the course
of events was as follows: He set out in the year A. D. 1095 for the
Hejaz. On his return from the pilgrimage, he journeyed to Damascus, and
made his abode there for some years in the minaret of the Grand Mosque,
composing several works of which the _Ihya_ is said to be one. Then
after visiting Jerusalem and perhaps Cairo and Alexandria, he returned to
his home at Tus.

According to one Arabic authority, when Al-Ghazali left Damascus in
his wanderings, he was accompanied by a disciple, a certain Abu Tahir
Ibrahim, who had been a pupil also at Nishapur under the great Imam; he
returned afterwards to Jurjan, his native place, and died a martyr in
A. H. 513. Other pupils of his at Damascus are also mentioned, but the
authorities do not agree.

Among many shrines at Jerusalem, Al-Ghazali visited the Mosque of Omar,
and the Dome of the Rock. In Sura xvii. 1, Mohammed is represented as
having taken his flight from Mecca to Jerusalem.—“Celebrated be the
praises of Him who by night took his servant from the _Masjidu ’l-Haram_
(the Sacred Mosque) to the _Masjidu ’l-Aqsa_ (the Remote Mosque), the
precinct of which we have blessed.”

As-Suyuti says Jerusalem is specially honoured by Moslems as being the
scene of the repentance of David and Solomon. “The place where God sent
His angel to Solomon, announced glad tidings to Zacharias and John,
showed David a plan of the Temple, and put all the beasts of the earth
and fowls of the air in subjection to him. It was at Jerusalem that
the prophets sacrificed; that Jesus was born and spoke in His cradle;
and it was from Jerusalem that Jesus ascended to heaven; and it will
be there that He will again descend. Gog and Magog shall subdue every
place on the earth but Jerusalem, and it will be there that God Almighty
will destroy them. It is in the holy land of Jerusalem that Adam and
Abraham, and Isaac and Mary are buried. And in the last days there will
be a general flight to Jerusalem, when the Ark and the Shechinah will be
again restored to the Temple. There will all mankind be gathered at the
Resurrection for judgment, and God will enter, surrounded by His angels,
into the Holy Temple, when He comes to judge the earth.”

Here Al-Ghazali would see the sacred footprint of Mohammed made in the
rock on his journey to heaven; the praying places of Abraham and Elijah
would be pointed out to him; the round hole where the rock let Mohammed
through when he ascended to heaven; the holy place in the roof of the
cavern where it arose to allow him to stand erect and to pray; the tongue
with which it spoke; and the marks of the Angel Gabriel’s finger where
it had to be held down from following him in his ascension! The place is
also pointed out by Moslems to-day where Solomon tormented the demons,
and also near the eastern wall where the throne stood whereon he sat when
dead, the corpse leaning on his staff to cheat the demons until the worms
had gnawed it through and the body fell forward. All this is found in
Moslem Tradition, and must have stirred the credulity or the scepticism
of Al-Ghazali. He himself tells us in one of his books that on the last
day Israfil, who, with Gabriel and Michael, has been restored to life,
“standing on the rock of the temple of Jerusalem, will at the command
of God call together the souls from all parts, those of believers from
Paradise and the unbelievers from hell, and throw them into his trumpet.
There they will be ranged in little holes, like bees in a hive, and will,
on his giving the last sound, be thrust out and fly like bees, filling
the whole space between earth and heaven. Then they will repair to their
respective bodies. The earth will then be an immense plain without hills
or villages, and the dead, after they have risen, will sit down each one
on his tomb, anxiously waiting for what is to come.”[39]

A modern traveller describes other Moslem superstitions connected
with this Mosque. “The little arcades at the top of the steps of the
platform are called ‘Balances,’ because the scales of judgment are to be
suspended there on the Great Day. The Dome of the Chain owes its name
to the circumstance that there a golden chain hung at David’s place of
judgment, which had to be grasped by witnesses and dropped a link when a
lie was told. A place in the outer wall is shown from which a wire will
be suspended on the Day of Judgment, whose other end will be made fast
to the Mount of Olives. Christ will sit on the wall and Mohammed on the
mount. Over this wire must all men find their way, but only the good will
cross, the wicked falling into the valley beneath. In the Al-Aqsa Mosque
a couple of pillars stand very near each other, so worn that they are
perceptibly thinned. The space between them bulges, and a piece of spiked
iron work is now inserted between them. These are another test for the
final award—he who could squeeze himself between them, and he alone, had
found the true ‘narrow way to heaven.’”

We have descriptions of Jerusalem by a Moslem who wrote at the end of the
tenth, and by another of the middle of the eleventh century. The latter
estimated the population at twenty thousand, and fancied that as many
more Moslem pilgrims came to the city in the month of their pilgrimage;
Christians and Jews then visited the city as they do to-day. Both these
writers praise the place for its cleanliness, which they attribute to its
geographical position and natural drainage. Yet the history of Jerusalem
throughout this century is little more than the record of damage and
repair to Christian and Moslem sanctuaries. In A. D. 1010 the Church
of the Holy Sepulchre was destroyed by the mad Sultan Hakim. This was
followed by other humiliations of the pilgrims and persecutions, until
Peter the Hermit arose in protest and the Crusades began.

We have no information as to how Al-Ghazali spent his days during
this visit at Jerusalem. It was a time of war and tumult throughout
Syria, on the eve of the Crusades. One can imagine with what interest
Al-Ghazali studied the whole situation and how this ardent champion
of the Moslem faith was stirred by the coming events whose shadows
were already resting on the Holy Land at the time of his visit there.
We do know that he lived the life of a mystic, and devoted himself to
prayer and fasting. Prayer occupies a large place in the life of every
conscientious Moslem. Not only are there the five ritual prayers, but the
night prayer which, according to Al-Ghazali himself, must be performed
between midnight and the beginning of dawn. It has been calculated that a
Moslem conscientiously performing his devotions recites the same form of
prayer at least seventy-five times a day. In addition to these prayers,
however, there are prayers called _witr_ to be performed after the night
prayer; _dhuha_, the prayer used in the forenoon; and the prayer of night
vigils, which take place between the last evening prayer and midnight. In
addition to observing all the above mentioned prayers, those who would
reach a high degree of perfection are recommended by Al-Ghazali, in
accordance with his own practices at this period, to engage in certain
additional devotional exercises called _wird_. We may best note the
character of this mystical devotion, in which he spent whole days and
nights, by quoting in substance from the _Ihya_ as follows:

“From many verses of the Koran it appears that the only way of becoming
united with God is constant intercourse with Him. This is the object of
the devotional services called _wird_ in which the believer can engage
at all times of the day as well as the night. The _wirds_ to be observed
during the day are seven: First _wird_. The Moslem on rising early
mentions the name of God, and praises Him, reciting certain petitions;
while dressing, he recites the appointed petitions, cleans his teeth
with the _miswak_, performs the _Wudhu_, then prays two Sunna _rakaʾs_
of dawn.[40] After this he repeats a petition and goes to the mosque
with collected thoughts. He enters the mosque solemnly and respectfully
with the right foot first, saying the appointed petitions on entering
and leaving. He enters the first rank of worshippers if there be room,
and prays the two _rakaʾs_ of dawn, if he has not done so already at
home; then two _rakaʾs_ of ‘Saluting the Mosque,’ and sits down repeating
petitions and praises, awaiting the assembling of the congregation.
After having repeated the obligatory prayer of dawn, he remains sitting
in the mosque till sunrise, meditating and repeating certain petitions,
and praises a certain number of times, counting them by the rosary,
and reciting portions of the Koran. [We know that the rosary was in
general use from a reference to it in the “Assemblies” of al-Hariri, and
in Al-Ghazali’s “Alchemy of Happiness.”] The second _wird_ is between
sunrise and an advanced forenoon hour; the worshipper says a prayer of
two _rakaʾs_, and when the sun has risen the length of a lance above
the horizon two more _rakaʾs_. This is the time when the believer may
perform good works, such as visiting the sick, etc. When nothing of the
kind requires his attention, he spends his time in repeating petitions,
in _zikr_, meditation and reading the Koran. The third _wird_ is between
morning and the ascending of the sun; the believer, after taking care
of his worldly affairs, engages in the devotional exercises as before
mentioned. Between the time when the sun has become somewhat high and the
noon prayer, four _rakaʾs_ between the _Azan_ and the _Ikama_ are said
and portions of the Koran are recited; this is the fourth _wird_. The
fifth, sixth and seventh occur after this until vespers. Finally there
are the _wirds_ of the night which are five, divided and described as
follows:—First night _wird_: after sunset, when the prayer of sunset has
been performed, to the time when darkness has set in, the worshipper says
two _rakaʾs_, in which certain portions of the Koran are recited, then
four long _rakaʾs_, and as much of the Koran as time allows. This _wird_
may be performed at home; but it is preferable to do so in the mosque.
Second night _wird_: this is from the darkness of the last _ʿIsha_ to
the time when people retire to sleep. This consists of three things: (1)
the obligatory _ʿIsha_ prayer; ten _rakaʾs_, viz., four before it and
six after it; (2) performing a prayer of thirteen _rakaʾs_, the last of
which is the _witr_ prayer. In this about three hundred verses of the
Koran are to be recited. (3) The _witr_ prayer before going to sleep,
unless one is accustomed to rise in the night, when it may be performed
later on, which is more meritorious. Third night _wird_: this consists of
sleep, and sleep may well be considered a devotional act, if enjoyed in
the proper way. Fourth night _wird_: this is from the time when the first
half of the night is spent to when only one-sixth of it still remains. At
this time the believer ought to rise from sleep and perform the prayer of
_tahajjud_. This prayer is also called the _hujud_. Mohammed mostly made
it a prayer of thirteen _rakaʾs_. Fifth night _wird_: this begins with
the last sixth of the night, called the _Sahar_, the early morning before
dawn to the appearing of dawn.” To these devotional exercises, described
in the _Ihya_, it was considered meritorious to add four additional good
actions: fasting, almsgiving, visiting the sick, attending funerals;
and finally all this punctilious remembrance of God through prayer was
supplemented by what is called _dhikr_—the special method of worship used
by the Sufi saints.

Al-Ghazali describes the method and effects of this practice in a
passage which Macdonald has summarized as follows: “Let the worshipper
reduce his heart to a state in which the existence of anything and its
non-existence are the same to him. Then let him sit alone in some corner,
limiting his religious duties to what is absolutely necessary, and not
occupying himself either with reciting the Koran or considering its
meaning or with books of religious traditions or with anything of the
sort. And let him see to it that nothing save God most High enters his
mind. Then, as he sits in solitude, let him not cease saying continuously
with his tongue, ‘Allah, Allah,’ keeping his thought on it. At last he
will reach a state when the motion of his tongue will cease, and it will
seem as though the word flowed from it. Let him persevere in this until
all trace of motion is removed from his tongue, and he finds his heart
persevering in the thought. Let him still persevere until the form of the
word, its letters and shape, is removed from his heart, and there remains
the idea alone, as though clinging to his heart, inseparable from it. So
far, all is dependent on his will and choice; but to bring the mercy of
God does not stand in his will or choice. He has now laid himself bare
to the breathings of that mercy, and nothing remains but to wait what
God will open to him, as God has done after this manner to prophets and
saints. If he follows the above course, he may be sure that the light of
the Real will shine out in his heart. At first unstable, like a flash of
lightning, it turns and returns; though sometimes it hangs back. And if
it returns, sometimes it abides and sometimes it is momentary. And if it
abides, sometimes its abiding is long, and sometimes short.”

Such is the teaching of Al-Ghazali in regard to the true life of devotion
and such we may believe was his own practice at Damascus and Jerusalem
during the years that followed his life of exile—the endless repetition
of God’s great names and “prayer without ceasing” in the Moslem sense.
One wonders what part of the day remained for the literary work and
teaching in which we know he was also engaged.[41]

An interesting story is told of his life at Jerusalem in these words:
“There came together the Imams Abu Hamid Al-Ghazali and Ismail Al-Kakimi
and Ibrahim Ash-Shibaki and Abu-l-Hasan Al-Basri, and a large number of
foreign elders, in the Cradle of ʾIsa (upon him be peace!) in Jerusalem,
and he (Al-Ghazali, apparently) recited these two lines:

    “‘May I be thy ransom! were it not for love thou wouldst have
        ransomed me, but by the magic of two eye-pupils thou hast
        taken me captive.
    I came to thee when my breast was straitened through love, and
        if thou hadst known how was my longing, thou wouldst have
        come to me.’

Then Abu-l-Hasan Al-Basri constrained himself to an ecstasy which
affected those that were present, and eyes wept and garments were rent
and Mohammed Al-Kazaruni died in the midst of the assembly in ecstasy.”

In Jerusalem he is said to have written his _Risalat Al-Qudsiya_; and the
date of his visit there must have been shortly before A. H. 492, for in
that year Jerusalem was captured by the Crusaders.[42]

It was natural for one of Al-Ghazali’s temperament to desire to pay
homage also at the tomb of Abraham, whom Moslems delight to call the
“Friend of God.” The religion of Islam is continually called the religion
of Abraham in the Koran. Tradition locates the so-called Machpelah
Cave in the eastern part of the present-day Hebron, on the edge of the
valley, and the mosque which now stands there is supposed to enclose the
grave. Hebron is about seventeen miles southwest of Jerusalem. Before
the twelfth century the Cave of Machpelah began to attract visitors
and pilgrims. “Benjamin of Tudela relates: ‘At Hebron there is a large
place of worship called “St. Abraham,” which was previously a Jewish
synagogue. The natives erected there six sepulchres, which they tell
foreigners are those of the Patriarchs and their wives, demanding money
as a condition of seeing them. If a Jew gives an additional fee to
the keeper of the cave, an iron door which dates from the time of our
forefathers opens, and the visitor descends with a lighted candle. He
crosses two empty caves, and in the third sees six tombs, on which the
names of the three Patriarchs and their wives are inscribed in Hebrew
characters. The cave is filled with barrels containing bones of people,
which are taken there as to a sacred place. At the end of the field of
the Machpelah stands Abraham’s house with a spring in front of it.’”[43]

The mosque of Hebron, over the tomb of Abraham, consists at present of a
quadrangular platform about seventy yards long by thirty-five wide. The
tomb which it covers is one of the sites which few Christian eyes have
seen. It is permitted to none but Moslems to approach nearer the entrance
than the seventh step of the staircase along the eastern wall.[44]

[Illustration: The dome of the rock, Jerusalem, as seen from the Lutheran
Church.]

Hebron is one of the oldest cities in the world and legends of all sorts
have gathered about the place. Even in Al-Ghazali’s day it was spoken of
as the place of Adam’s creation and death, the scene of Abel’s murder,
and the place where Abraham made his home.

After Al-Ghazali’s visit to Hebron he probably made his pilgrimage
to Mecca. Whether the journey was made by sea or by land, we do not
know. In any case it was full of peril at that period. Very possibly
Al-Ghazali took the long caravan journey, following the route of the
Damascus pilgrimage in our day. It was considered proper, however, to
visit Mecca first, and Medina on the return journey. Al-Ghazali himself
advises this in his directions for the correct performance of the rites
of pilgrimage.[45]

In what spirit he fulfilled the rites we know from one of his spiritual
teachers whose text-book on the subject Al-Ghazali had mastered. “A man
who had just returned from the pilgrimage came to Junayd. Junayd said:
‘From the hour when you first journeyed from your home have you also
been journeying away from all sins?’ He said ‘No.’ ‘Then,’ said Junayd,
‘you have made no journey. At every stage where you halted for the
night did you traverse a station on the way to God?’ ‘No,’ he replied.
‘Then,’ said Junayd, ‘you have not trodden the road, stage by stage.
When you put on the pilgrim’s garb at the proper place, did you discard
the qualities of human nature as you cast off your clothes?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then
you have not put on the pilgrim’s garb. When you stood on ʾArafat, did
you stand one moment in contemplation of God?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then you have not
stood at ʾArafat. When you went to Muzdalifa and achieved your desire,
did you renounce all sensual desires?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then you have not gone
to Muzdalifa. When you circumambulated the Kaʾaba, did you behold the
immaterial beauty of God in the abode of purification?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then you
have not circumambulated the Kaʾaba. When you ran between Safa and Marwa,
did you attain to purity (_safa_) and virtue (_muruwwat_)?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then
you have not run. When you came to Mina, did all your wishes (_muna_)
cease?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then you have not yet visited Mina. When you reached the
slaughter place and offered sacrifices, did you sacrifice the objects of
worldly desire?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then you have not sacrificed. When you threw the
pebbles, did you throw away whatever sensual thoughts were accompanying
you?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then you have not yet thrown the pebbles, and you have not
yet performed the pilgrimage.’”

Such was the mystical interpretation of the rites at Mecca taught by the
Sufis to their disciples.

Mecca, when Al-Ghazali made the pilgrimage, was under the rule of
the Sherif Abu Hashim (A. D. 1063-1094). Half a century earlier the
Karmathians, perhaps the most fanatic of all Moslem sects, had besieged
Mecca, captured the city, murdered the pilgrims by thousands, and carried
away the famous black stone to Bahrein on the Persian Gulf.[46] By taking
away this sacred treasure they hoped to put an end to the pilgrimage,
but were disappointed. In A. D. 950 the stone was returned for a heavy
ransom.[47] It was because of the constant disputes between the Caliphs
of Bagdad and Egypt that the defense of the holy cities was finally given
into the hand of the Sherifs.

Abu Hashim was a time-server, and cared more for bribes than for
religion, according to the testimony of Arabian chroniclers. In A.
D. 1070 he changed the name of the Fatimide Sultans for that of the
Abbassides at Friday prayers, and received much bounty. In 1075 he sold
the same privilege to the Fatimides, and in 1076 to the Caliphs of
Bagdad. This conduct so enraged the Sultan of Bagdad that in 1091 he sent
bands of Turkomans against Mecca.

Chronicles of the holy city during this period show that the pilgrimage
was accompanied by grave dangers because of Bedouin robbers as well as
disturbances in Mecca itself. Sometimes these uprisings were directed by
Abu Hashim himself, as was the case in A. D. 1094.[48]

Just about the time of Al-Ghazali’s visit, the various buildings at
Mecca and the _Beit Allah_ itself, had been repaired and beautified. The
four _maqams_ or places of prayer for the orthodox sects as they now
stand were built in A. H. 1074. The place of the Shafiʿ sect to which
Al-Ghazali belonged, is directly over the well of Zem Zem, to which it
serves as an upper chamber. The building, erected in 1072, is in use
to-day. The great pulpit of white marble was sent to Mecca in A. H. 969
by the Sultan of Egypt. It is still in use. Perchance Al-Ghazali ascended
these very stairs and addressed the pilgrims. In A. D. 1030 a violent
torrent swept over Mecca, and nearly ruined the Kaʾaba. The repairs were
not finished until 1040.[49]

With his religious pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina it seems that
Al-Ghazali’s life of strict retirement ended, except for his visit to
Alexandria and beyond. Apparently he proposed to make a journey to Spain
and the great Sultan of the West, Yusuf bin Tashfin, on whose behalf he
had given _Fatwas_ or religious decisions, but the news of the Sultan’s
death put an end to his plans, according to some authorities. Others say
that at this time he was summoned to teach again at Nishapur.

The details of his life during the mysterious ten years of his wanderings
are most conflicting. According to ʿAbd al-Ghafir, a personal friend of
Al-Ghazali, he went a second time to Mecca, afterwards to Syria, and
then wandered from shrine to shrine for nearly ten years. Next to “The
Confessions,” the best authority on his life is undoubtedly this same
ʿAbd al-Ghafir. What he tells us of Al-Ghazali’s life must have been
gained from personal knowledge, or go back immediately to Al-Ghazali
himself. “According to him, Al-Ghazali set out on pilgrimage to Mecca,
then went to Syria, and remained there wandering from place to place
and shrine to shrine nearly ten years. At this time he composed several
of his works, the _Ihya_ and books abbreviated from it, such as the
_Arbaʾin_ and the _Rasaʾil_; besides labouring at his own spiritual
advancement and growth through the religious exercises of the Sufis. Then
he returned to his home and lived there a retired life for some time,
absorbed in meditation, but gradually becoming more and more sought after
as a teacher and guide to the spiritual life. At length Fakhr al-Mulk
ʾAli b. Nizam Al-Mulk Jamal Ash-Shuhada, who had previously been Wazir to
Barqiyaruq, became Wazir to Sinjar the son of Malik Shah at Nishapur, and
by him such pressure was put on Al-Ghazali that he finally consented to
resume teaching in the Maymuna Nizamiyya Madrasa there.”[50]

We have reference to but no detail of Al-Ghazali’s visit to Cairo, the
great centre of Moslem architecture and learning in the West, as Bagdad
was in the East. Nor, strange to say, have I found reference in his
works to this visit. It is possible that he was not received altogether
with favour by the religious leaders of Al-Azhar at the time, but his
reputation was already world-wide, and many of his pupils at Bagdad and
Nishapur were from Egypt and North Africa.

At the time of Al-Ghazali’s visit, Cairo was still the great centre
of Arab civilization, and had all the glory which the Fatimid dynasty
had bestowed upon it. The splendid palaces of the Caliphs formed the
central portion of the town. The three massive gates which still command
admiration at the present day, Bab Al-Futuh, Bab Al-Nasr and Bab
Az-Zuwaila, led into the city. In A. D. 1087 the walls were rebuilt, and
these massive gateways constructed along with others which are no longer
standing. In the vault of the archways of these gates, there used to be
two chambers, and these were used by the Egyptian sovereigns and their
friends to watch the various spectacles, especially the departure and
return of the sacred carpet.

The intellectual and religious life of the city centred in the great
mosque of Al-Azhar, which had been completed in A. D. 1012. Cairo was
not yet the economic centre for all Egypt which it became later, but it
was the seat of a splendid court, with military pageantry, as well as a
centre of religious learning. Ibn Tuwair and others have given us vivid
pictures of the ceremonial processions and festivals, the magazines,
treasuries, stables, and royal household.

As for Alexandria, where we _know_ Al-Ghazali lived for some time before
his return to Syria, it did not have a high reputation at that time for
learning. It was rather a port of trade, from which men passed on to Misr
(Cairo) or went by sea to Syria. Hamadhani makes one of his characters
say:

    “I am of the citizens of Alexandria,
    Of sound and pure stock among them,
    The age and the people thereof are stupid,
    Therefore I made my stupidity my steed!”

But in Moslem tradition, Alexandria has high honour. Moslems show the
tomb of Daniel the prophet, also that of Alexander the Great whose story
is told in the Koran. Alexandria also boasts two celebrated Walis or holy
men. One is Mohammed al Busiri, the author of the poem called Al Burdah,
universally celebrated; and the other Abu Abbas Al-Andalusi, at whose
tomb prayer is never offered in vain. There is also a prophecy that when
Mecca falls into the hands of the infidels Alexandria will succeed to its
honours.[51]

From Alexandria Al-Ghazali went to Damascus and then to Nishapur and from
there to Bagdad, or from Damascus direct to Bagdad, where he taught the
_Ihya_ and preached. As-Subki tells us that the people crowded to hear
him, and that notes of his sermons to the number of 183 were taken by one
of those present, who read them to Al-Ghazali before they were circulated.

The following story is told of his life at this time: Once while
teaching the _Ihya_ at Bagdad, he began to quote: “He has made beloved
the homes of men, as abodes of desire which the heart has decreed;
whenever they remember their homes these remind them of the pledges of
youth there, and they long thither.” Then he wept, and those present
wept with him. Thereafter some one saw him in the open country with a
patched dervish-garment on, a water-vessel and an iron-shod staff in
his hand,—all in strange contrast to the states in which he had seen
him before, with three hundred pupils around him, including one hundred
of the chief men of Bagdad. So he said, “O Imam, is not the teaching of
science more fitting?” But Al-Ghazali looked at him with red eyes and
said, “When the full moon of happiness rises in the firmament of will,
the sun of setting departs in the East of union.” Then he recited, “I
abandoned the love of Layla and my happiness was far, and I returned
to the companionship of my first alighting-place; then cried to me my
longings, ‘Welcome! these are the alighting-places of her whom thou
lovest, draw up and alight.’”

Of his spiritual experiences during these ten years of retirement and
wandering, and during the years that followed, when he taught others the
way of the mystic, we will speak later.

We know that he left Bagdad, returned to Tus, his native place, and
settled down to study and contemplation. Strange to say, at this time of
his life he seems to have found the greatest delight in going back again
to the study of Tradition, especially the collections of Al-Bokhari and
of Muslim. All his biographers seem to agree in this. He had charge of a
_madrasa_ and of the _khanka_ or monastery for Sufis. Every moment was
filled with study and devotion until in the fifty-fifth year of his life
(lunar calendar) the end came.

The austerity and privations of his long wanderings doubtless wore down
his strength. One who had risen to so high a position of authority on
religious matters also had to pay the price of leadership in controversy
with opponents, and of their envy, and their slander, as we are told
by al-Ghafir. This may have been, Macdonald thinks, one of the causes
for his removal from Nishapur to Tus. A friend remarks in regard to his
attitude towards those who opposed his teaching and envied his influence:
“However much he met of contradiction and attack and slander, it made
no impression on him, and he did not trouble himself to answer his
assailants. I visited him many times, and it was no bare conjecture of
mine that he, in spite of what I saw in him in time past of maliciousness
and roughness towards people, and how he looked upon them contemptuously
through his being led astray by what God had granted him of ease in word
and thought and expression, and through the seeking of rank and position,
had come to be the very opposite and was purified from these stains. And
I used to think that he was wrapping himself in the garment of pretense,
but I realized after investigation that the thing was the opposite of
what I had thought, and that the man had recovered after being mad.”

Al-Ghazali died on Monday, the fourteenth of Jumada II, A. H. 505 (Dec.
18th, 1111). His brother Ahmad (quoted by Murtadha from Ibn Jawzi’s
_Kitab ath-thabat ʾind al-mamat_) gives the following account of his
death: “On Monday, at dawn, my brother performed the ablution and prayed.
Then he said, ‘Bring me my grave-clothes,’ and he took them and kissed
them and laid them on his eyes and said, ‘I hear and obey to go in to the
King.’ And he stretched out his feet towards Mecca, and was taken to the
good will of God Most High. He was buried at, or outside of, Tabran, the
citadel of Tus, and Ibn As-Samaʾni visited his grave there.”

Later biographers were not satisfied with the bare facts of his decease.
Murtadha gives a far more interesting story. “When death drew near to
the Imam Abu Hamid Al-Ghazali, he commanded his servant, an excellent
and religious man, to dig his grave in the middle of his house, and to
summon the people of the neighbouring villages to attend his funeral;
that they should not touch him, but that a company of three men unknown
in the region of Al-ʾIraq would come out of the desert, that two of them
would wash him, and the third would undertake the prayer over him without
the advice or command of any one. Then, when he died, the servant did
according to all that he had commanded, and required the presence of the
people. And when the people gathered to attend the funeral, they saw
three men who had come out of the desert. Two of them began to wash the
corpse, while the third vanished and did not appear. But when they had
washed him and arranged him in the grave-clothes, and carried his bier
and laid it on the edge of the grave, the third appeared wrapped in his
robe with a black border on both sides, turbaned with wool, and he prayed
for him and the people prayed with him. Then he gave the benediction and
departed and hid from the people. And some of the excellent of the people
of Al-ʾIraq who were present at the funeral had noticed him carefully,
but did not know him until some of them heard a _Hatif_ in the night
saying to them, ‘The man who led the people in prayer is Abu ʾAbd Allah
Mohammed b. Ishaq Amghar, the Sharif. He came from the farthest Maghrib,
from ʾAyn al-Qatr, and those who washed the corpse are his comrades Abu
Shuʾayb Ayyub b. Saʾid and Abu ʾIsa Wajih.’ And when they heard that they
journeyed from Al-ʾIraq to Sanhaja of the farthest Maghrib, and when
they had reached them and asked of them their prayers, they returned
to Al-ʾIraq and related it to the Sufis and published their miracle
(_karama_). Then a company of them, when they heard that, went to visit
them and found them to be those whom they noticed carefully, and they
asked of them their prayers. And this is a strange story.”[52]

An equally remarkable story is told of the death of Al-Ghazali’s younger
brother in the books of the Persian mystics.[53] The verses given might
well apply to Al-Ghazali himself and his views of life and death.
“Moghith related, on the authority of Kadiri tradition, how the famous
Ahmed-Al-Ghazali, native of Tus in Persia, said one day to his disciples,
‘Go and bring me new and white garments.’ They went; and on returning
with the objects required, found their master dead; by his side was a
paper on which were written the following stanzas:

    “‘Tell my friends, who behold me dead,
    Weeping and mourning my loss a while,
    Think not this corpse before you myself:
    That corpse is mine, but it is not I.
    I am an undying life, and this is not my body,
    Many years my house and my garment of change;
    I am the bird, and this body was my cage,
    I have wing’d my flight elsewhere, and left it for a token.
    I am the pearl, and this my shell,
    Broken open and abandon’d to worthlessness;
    I am the treasure, and this was a spell
    Thrown over me, till the treasure was released in truth.
    Thanks be to God, who has delivered me,
    And has assign’d me a lasting abode in the highest.
    There am I now the day conversing with the happy,
    And beholding face to face unveiled Deity;
    Contemplating the Mirror wherein I see and read
    Past and present, and whatever remains to be.
    Food and drink too are mine, yet both are one;
    Mystery known to him who is worthy to know.
    It is not “wine sweet of taste” that I drink;
    No, nor “water,” but the pure milk of a mother.
    Understand my meaning aright, for the secret
    Is signified by words of symbol and figure,—
    I have journey’d on, and left you behind;
    How could I make an abode of your halting-stage?
    Ruin then my house and break my cage in pieces,
    And let the shell go perish with kindred illusions;
    Tear my garment, the veil once thrown over me;
    Then bury all these, and leave them alike for I go.
    Deem not death death, for it is in truth
    Life of lives, the goal of all our longings.
    Think lovingly of a God whose Name is love,
    Who joys in rewarding, and come on secure of fear.
    Whence I am, I behold you undying spirits like myself,
    And see that our lot is one, and you as I.’”

We are indebted to the Rev. Dwight M. Donaldson of Mashad, Persia, for
the interesting photographs of the ruins of Tus and of the supposed tomb
of Al-Ghazali. The mosque is very old and probably dates from the time
of Al-Ghazali. The grave shown in the picture, however, _may_ not be the
grave of Al-Ghazali the mystic but of another celebrated Ghazali. For we
read in As-Subqi (Vol. III, p. 36) that there was one called Ahmed ibn
Mohammed Abu Hamed Al-Ghazali, the older and earlier one. He says that
people have thrown doubt upon his very existence, but that after careful
inquiry he has found mention of this man in several books, including the
_Kitab Al Ansab_ of Ibn As-Samʾani. He mentions the fact that this man
also lived in Khorasan, was celebrated for his learning, wrote books on
theological questions, and was buried at Tus, where his grave was well
known; and because of this people called him the Old Ghazali, and used to
come to his grave in order to obtain answers to their prayers. He thinks
that this Ghazali was either the uncle or the grand-uncle of Al-Ghazali,
whose biography we have written. Incidentally we may conclude from this
statement of As-Subqi that the name of Al-Ghazali was not given to him
because his _father_ was a spinner of wool! It must have been an old
family name.

Mr. Donaldson gives this interesting information: “The walls of the old
city of Tus still stand. It is one _farsakh_ around them, three and a
third miles. There are many fragments of towers and in nine places there
are remains of gates. The wall was originally five yards wide. In the
largest cemetery the tombstone of Ahmad Ghazali may still be seen. This
cemetery lies southwest from the city and while the bulk of it is now
under cultivation, the more distant part that lies on the higher ground
beyond the waterway has been kept a cemetery.

“The picture I have enclosed of Ghazali’s tomb is not as satisfactory
as I would have liked. It shows that a large chip has been taken from
one corner of the grave. The stone is about two yards long, one-third
yard wide, and one-third yard high. There are positive indications of an
effort having been made to cut off the portion on which the name of Ahmed
Al-Ghazali appears. It is the part that is chipped in the picture. About
at the point where the chipping appears to begin there is a straight line
cut about one inch deep across the top of the stone.

“On the road that runs through the city from the southwest gate the old
mosque is imposing even in its ruined condition. It stands eighteen yards
high and the inner measurements show it to consist of a square base,
five yards high, then an octagonal structure eight yards high. (See
illustration.)

“Outside the southwest gate an ancient bridge is still in use, as
caravans from Mashad come through the old city of Tus. This bridge has
eight arches, each four and one-half yards wide. The name of the stream
is the _Kashf Rud_.

“The fortress itself is interesting; it is surrounded by a moat and a
wall, within which lies a large courtyard and the high approach to the
fort itself. At present we could walk around the wall and approach the
fort by a passage in the rear. In the courtyard they are now raising the
best water-melons we have eaten in Persia. Four gigantic corner fragments
of the fort are now standing. In the midst of the débris of bricks within
these old walls we found interesting fragments of pottery.”

In another letter from Mashad, Persia, dated January 17, 1917, the
Rev. Dwight M. Donaldson writes: “This week I made another trip to
Tus, carefully examining again the tombstone of Ghazali. As I wrote
you before, the stone has been badly worn and in addition to that has
been mutilated. However, on the point of doubt as to whether the stone
photographed was really the one marking Mohammed Al-Ghazali’s tomb, or
the tomb of another Ahmad Al-Ghazali, I can now say that I believe it is
the tomb of Abu Hamed ibn Mohammed ibn Mohammed ibn Mohammed Al-Ghazali,
for the reason that we can clearly read on the corner of the top of the
stone, the end which some one in times past attempted to cut off, the
name ‎‏غزّالي‏‎ and ‎‏بوحا‏‎. And as one studies the stone he is almost
willing to declare that the name is fully intelligible with the exception
of the initial _aleph_. The whole top is badly worn indeed, but the word
that my _mirza_ first read as Ahmad is clearly not Ahmad, but what it is
we cannot tell. The damage is too complete.

“You will notice that Ghazzali appears in the stone to have been spelled
with a _tashdeed_ and yet the mark we have considered a tashdeed is not
the usual form (v instead of w).”

This investigation, therefore, would seem to settle two points: that we
have at Tus the neglected and mutilated grave of the great mystic and
theologian, Al-Ghazali; and that on this grave the middle letter of the
name is double. In view of the common usage, however, and in deference
to the authorities of Moslems themselves, we have uniformly written
Ghazali.




V

His Creed and Credulity

    “This man, (Al-Ghazali) if ever any have deserved the name,
    was truly a ‘divine,’ and he may be justly placed on a level
    with Origen, so remarkable was he for learning and ingenuity,
    and gifted with such a rare faculty for the skilful and
    worthy exposition of doctrine. All that is good, noble, and
    sublime that his great soul had compassed he bestowed upon
    Mohammedanism, and he adorned the doctrines of the Koran with
    so much piety and learning that, in the form given them by him,
    they seem, in my opinion, worthy the assent of Christians.
    Whatsoever was most excellent in the philosophy of Aristotle or
    in the Sufic mysticism he discreetly adapted to the Mohammedan
    theology; from every school he sought the means of shedding
    light and honour upon religion; while his sincere piety and
    lofty conscientiousness imparted to all his writings a sacred
    majesty. He was the first of Mohammedan divines.”

                                              —_Dr. August Tholuck._


V

HIS CREED AND CREDULITY

Although, according to his own testimony in his “Confessions,” Al-Ghazali
was troubled from his earliest years with doubt and scepticism, he was
not willing to yield to it, and his faith rose triumphant above all
his doubts. This is one of the outstanding facts in his biography. He
could say with the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews that “faith
is the substance of things hoped for and the evidence of things not
seen.” Not only did he find God in nature and in his own conscience
and consciousness, but he was a firm believer in revelation. Naturally
the only revelation to which Al-Ghazali turned as the basis, the very
bed-rock of religious faith, was the Koran, the eternal, uncreated
word of God according to Moslem teaching; and also to the life of the
Prophet Mohammed, his practices and his precepts handed down in orthodox
Tradition—this also was a revelation from God.

Whether he ever read the Old and New Testament is a question we consider
unanswered. He did not draw his creed from this source.

Al-Ghazali gives the distinction very clearly, almost as clearly as the
Epistle of James, between faith and works. He was a dogmatic theologian
and laid down, as we shall see in this chapter, with punctilious care
every point of dogma; but he was also a moralist and a man of high ideals
which he sought to attain through prayer and fasting and pilgrimage, and
a life of utter devotion to the will of God. His faith was living and
practical, not theoretical and scholastic. In his great work, the _Ihya_,
he discusses the whole subject of faith, and enumerates the following
classes of believers:

“He who combines inner belief with outward confession and good works is a
true believer and enters Paradise.

“He who combines inner belief with outward confession and some good
works but commits one or more great sins, does not thereby cease to be a
believer, though his faith is not of the highest degree. The Muʾtazila
deny that such a one can be considered a believer, but that nevertheless
by committing deadly sins he does not become an unbeliever but is in an
intermediate state between a believer and an infidel. An infidel is an
impious person and goes into everlasting hell-fire.”

The opinions with regard to the person who combines inner belief with
outward confession, but has no good works are divided. Abu Talibu’l
Makki says: “Good works are part of the faith, and faith cannot exist
without them.” The Sunni doctors of Islam, however, reject this opinion
as absolutely false, for they say that it is a truth accepted by general
agreement, that a man who believes and confesses and dies before he has
done any good work, is a true believer and enters Paradise; that good
works cannot consequently be considered as a necessary part of faith, and
that faith can exist without them.

“He who believes in his heart, but dies before he has either confessed
or performed good works, is nevertheless a true believer and enters
into Paradise. Those who consider confession a necessary part of faith
naturally consider that such a one has died without faith, an opinion
absolutely contrary to the Sunni dogma.

“He who believes in his heart, and has time and opportunity of
confessing, and knows that it is the duty of the Moslem to do so, and
does not confess his faith, is nevertheless a believer in the sight
of God, and will not be cast into everlasting hell-fire, for faith is
the mere belief, intellectual conviction and assent, and this belief
does not cease to exist through the want of outward confession. Such a
man is a believer in the sight of God, but an unbeliever in this world
before the court of justice and with regard to the rights of Moslems.
In case of an impediment of the tongue, a sign with the hand is as
good as confession with the tongue. The sect of the Murjiʾa go too far
by saying that a believer, even if he act wickedly, will never enter
hell-fire. _The orthodox doctrine on this subject is that every one,
even the most perfect believer, will enter hell-fire, for no one is free
from committing some sins, for which he must enter fire; only infidels,
however, will remain in it forever._”

“He who confesses with the tongue saying: ‘There is no God but God, and
Mohammed is His apostle,’ but does not believe it in his heart is an
infidel in the sight of God, and will be cast into eternal hell-fire. In
this world, however, he is to be considered and treated as a believer and
a Moslem, for man cannot penetrate into the secrets of the heart, and
the confession of the mouth must be taken to be the interpreter of the
thoughts of the heart. In order, however, to make a man a Moslem in this
world, before the law, in the sight of the Qadi, confession is necessary.”

Not only does he classify believers in this careful way, but he also
discusses the question, in the first book of his _Ihya_, whether Islam
is the same thing as _iman_ (faith) or not, and if these two are not
the same thing, can they exist separately or must they necessarily be
combined? “Some say that Islam and _Iman_ are synonymous terms and that
consequently every believer is a Moslem and every Moslem a believer.”
This is the opinion held by the orthodox school. Others say that they are
distinct things but joined together. Al-Ghazali answers this difficult
question in this way: _Iman_ (Faith), from the linguistic point of
view, means belief, intellectual conviction and assent; Islam means
submission, subjection, obedience. The seat of _Iman_ is the heart or
mind, and the tongue is its interpreter. Islam comprises belief with
the heart and confession with the tongue, and good works by the members
of the body, and is consequently a more comprehensive term than _Iman_.
_Iman_ is one of the component parts of Islam, and Islam, therefore,
includes it; but _Iman_, being a more restricted term, does not include
Islam. From a linguistic point of view the two terms are therefore not
synonymous. From the point of view of the law and religion, and in a
theological sense the two terms are sometimes used as being synonymous,
and sometimes as having different meanings and as being intermingled,
comprised in each other. _Iman_ and Islam are found in the individual who
believes in his heart and outwardly observes the precepts of Islam; Islam
exists separately in the individual, who only believes in his heart; but
neither confesses, nor does good works, and Islam exists separately in
him who outwardly observes the precepts of Islam, without inner belief.

What the faith of Islam meant to Al-Ghazali we know from all his works,
especially from the _Ihya_, which besides other topics gives a full
exposition of Moslem belief in regard to the six articles of their creed
and the five pillars of practice. The reader may judge for himself both
the contents and omissions of Al-Ghazali’s _credo_ from the following
brief exposition which he wrote for his pupils:

                            HIS CREED[54]

    “We say—and in God is our trust—Praise belongeth unto God,
    the Beginner, the Bringer-back, the Doer of what He willeth,
    the Lord of the Glorious Throne and of Mighty Grasp, the
    Guider of His chosen creatures to the right path and to the
    true way, the Granter of benefits to them after the witness
    to the Unity (_tawhid_) by guarding their articles of belief
    from obscurities of doubt and opposition. He that bringeth
    them to follow His Apostle, the Chosen one (_Al-Mustafa_) and
    to imitate the traces of His Companions, the most honoured,
    through His aid and right guidance revealed to them in His
    essence and His works by His beautiful qualities which none
    perceives, save he who inclines his ear. He is the witness who
    maketh known to them that He in His essence is One without any
    partner (_sharik_). Single without any similar, Eternal without
    any opposite, Separate without any like. He is One, Prior
    (_qadim_) with nothing before Him, from eternity (_azali_)
    without any beginning, abiding in existence with none after
    Him, to eternity (_abadi_) without any end, substituting
    without ending, abiding without termination. He hath not ceased
    and He will not cease to be described with glorious epithets;
    finishing and ending, though the cutting off of the ages and
    the terminating of allotted times have no rule over Him, but He
    is the First and Last, the External and the Internal, and He
    knoweth everything.

    “We witness that He is not a body possessing form, nor a
    substance possessing bounds and limits; He does not resemble
    bodies, either in limitation or in accepting division. He is
    not a substance and substances do not exist in Him; and He is
    not an accident and accidents do not exist in Him, nay He does
    not resemble an entity, and no entity resembles Him; nothing
    is like Him and He is not like anything; measure does not
    bound Him and boundaries do not contain Him; the directions do
    not surround Him and neither the earth nor the Heavens are on
    different sides of Him. Lo, He is seated firmly upon His throne
    (_ʿarsh_), after the manner which He has said, and in the sense
    in which He willed a being-seated firmly (_istawa_), which
    is far removed from contact and fixity of location and being
    established and being enveloped and being removed. The Throne
    does not carry Him, but the Throne and those that carry it are
    carried by the grace of His power and mastered by His grasp.
    He is above the Throne and the Heavens and above everything
    unto the limit of the Pleiades, with an aboveness which does
    not bring Him nearer to the Throne and the Heavens, just as
    it does not make Him further from the earth and the Pleiades.
    Nay, He is exalted by degrees from the Throne and the Heavens,
    just as He is exalted by degrees from the earth and the
    Pleiades; and He, in spite of that, is near to every entity and
    is ‘nearer to a creature than the artery of his neck’ (Koran
    50, 15), and He witnesseth everything, since His nearness
    does not resemble the nearness of bodies, just as His essence
    does not resemble the essence of bodies. He does not exist in
    anything, just as nothing exists in Him; He has exalted Himself
    far therefrom that a place should contain Him, just as He has
    sanctified Himself far therefrom that time should limit Him.
    Nay, He was before He had created Time and Place and He is now
    above that which He was above, and distinct from His creatures
    through His qualities. There is not in His essence His equal,
    nor in His equal His essence. He is far removed from change of
    state or of place. Events have no place in Him, and mishaps do
    not befall Him. Nay, He does not cease, through His glorious
    epithets, to be far removed from changing, and through His
    perfect qualities to be independent of perfecting increase.
    The existence of His essence is known by reason; His essence
    is seen with the eyes, a benefit from Him and a grace to the
    pious, in the Abiding Abode and a completion in beatitude from
    Him, through gazing upon His gracious face.

    “We witness that He is living, powerful, commanding,
    conquering; inadequacy and weakness befall Him not; slumber
    seizes Him not, nor sleep. Passing away does not happen to
    Him, nor death. He is Lord of the Worlds, the Visible and the
    Invisible, that of Force and that of Might; He possesses Rule
    and Conquest and Creation and Command; the heavens are rolled
    in His right hand and the created things are overcome in His
    grasp; He is separate in creating and inventing; He is one in
    bringing into existence and innovating; He created the creation
    and their works and decreed their sustenance and their terms of
    life; not a decreed thing escapes His grasp and the mutations
    of things are not distant from His power; the things which He
    hath decreed cannot be reckoned and the things which He knoweth
    have no end.

    “We witness that He knoweth all the things that can be known,
    comprehending that which happeneth from the bounds of the earth
    unto the topmost heavens; no grain in the earth or the heavens
    is distant from His knowledge. Yea, He knows the creeping of
    the black ant upon the rugged rock in a dark night, and He
    perceives the movement of the mote in the midst of the air; He
    knows the secret and the concealed and has knowledge of the
    suggestions of the minds and the movements of the thoughts and
    the concealed things of the inmost parts, by a knowledge which
    is prior from eternity; He has not ceased to be describable by
    it, from the ages of the ages, not by a knowledge which renews
    itself and arises in His essence by arrival and removal.

    “We witness that He is a Willer of the things that are, a
    Director of the things that happen; there does not come
    about in the world seen or unseen, little or much, small or
    great, good or evil, advantage or disadvantage, faith or
    unbelief, knowledge or ignorance, success or loss, increase or
    diminution, obedience or rebellion, except by His will. What
    He wills is, and what He wills not is not. Not a glance of one
    who looks, or a slip of one who thinks is outside of His will;
    He is the creator, the Bringer back, the Doer of that which
    He wills. There is no opponent of His command and no repeater
    of His destiny and no refuge for a creature from disobeying
    Him, except by His help and His mercy, and no strength to a
    creature to obey Him except by His will. Even though mankind
    and the _Jinn_ and the Angels and the _Shaytans_ were to unite
    to remove a single grain in the world or to bring it to rest
    without His will, they would be too weak for that. His will
    subsists in His essence as one of His qualities; He hath not
    ceased to be described through it as a Willer, in His infinity
    of the existence of things at their appointed times which He
    hath decreed. So they come into existence at their appointed
    times even as He has willed in His infinity without precedence
    or sequence. They happen according to the agreement of His
    knowledge and His will, without exchange or change in planning
    of things, nor with arranging of thoughts or awaiting of time,
    and therefore one thing does not distract Him from another.

    “And we witness that He is a Hearer and a Seer. He hears and
    sees and no audible thing is distant from His hearing, and no
    visible thing is far from His seeing, however fine it may be.
    Distance does not curtain off His hearing and darkness does not
    dull His seeing; He sees without eyeball or eyelid, and hears
    without earholes or ears, just as He knows without a brain and
    seizes without a limb and creates without an instrument, since
    His qualities do not resemble that quality of created things,
    just as His essence does not resemble the essences of created
    things.

    “And we witness that He speaks, commanding, forbidding,
    praising, threatening, with a speech from all eternity, prior,
    subsisting in His essence, not resembling the speech of created
    things. It is not a sound which originates through the slipping
    out of air, or striking of bodies; nor is it a letter which is
    separated off by closing down a lip or moving a tongue. And the
    Koran and the _Tawrat_ (the Law of Moses) and the _Injil_ (the
    Gospel) and the _Zabbur_ (the Psalms) are His books revealed to
    His Apostles. And the Koran is repeated by tongues, written in
    copies, preserved in hearts; yet it in spite of that, is prior
    subsisting in the essence of God, not subject to division and
    separation through being transferred to hearts and leaves.
    And Musa heard the speech of God without a sound and without a
    letter, just as the pious see the essence of God, in the other
    world without a substance or an attribute.

    “And since He has those qualities, He is living, Knowing,
    Powerful, a Willer, a Hearer, a Seer, a Speaker, through Life,
    Power, Knowledge, Will, Hearing, Seeing, Speech, not by a thing
    separated from His essence.

    “We witness that there is no entity besides Him, except what is
    originated from His action and proceeds from His justice, after
    the most beautiful and perfect and complete and just of ways.
    He is wise in His actions, just in His determinations; there is
    no analogy between His justice and the justice of creatures,
    since tyranny is conceivable in the case of a creature, when he
    deals with the property of some other than himself, but tyranny
    is not conceivable in the case of God. For He never encounters
    any property of some other than Himself so that His dealing
    with it might be tyranny. Everything besides Him, consisting
    of men and _Jinn_ and Angels and _Shaytans_ and the heavens
    and the earth and animals and plants and inanimate things
    and substance and attribute and things perceived and things
    felt, is an originated thing, which He created by His power
    before any other had created it, after it had not existed,
    and which He invented after that it had not been a thing,
    since He in eternity was an entity by Himself, and there was
    not along with Him any other than He. So He originated the
    creation thereafter, by way of manifestation of His power, and
    verification of that which had preceded of His Will, and of
    that which existed in eternity of His Word; not because He has
    any lack of it or need of it. And He is gracious in creating
    and in making for the first time and in imposing of duty—not
    of necessity—and He is generous in befitting; and well-doing
    and gracious helping belong to Him, since He is able to bring
    upon His creatures different kinds of punishment and to test
    them with different varieties of pains and ailments. And if
    He did that it would be justice on His part, and would not be
    a vile action or tyranny in Him. He rewardeth His believing
    creatures for their acts of obedience by a decision which is of
    generosity and of promise and not of right and of obligation,
    since no particular action towards any one is incumbent upon
    Him, and tyranny is inconceivable in Him, and no one possesses
    a right against Him. And His right to acts of obedience is
    binding upon the creatures because He has made it binding
    through the tongues of His prophets, not by reason alone. But
    He sent apostles and manifested their truth by plain miracles,
    and they brought His commands and forbiddings and promisings
    and threatenings. So, belief in them as to what they have
    brought is incumbent upon the creation.

    “The second Word of Witnessing is witnessing that the
    apostolate belongs to the apostle, and that God sent the
    unlettered Qurayshite prophet, Mohammed, with his apostolate
    to the totality of Arabs and foreigners and Jinn and men.
    And He abrogated by his law the other Laws except so much of
    them as He confirmed; and made him excellent over the rest of
    the prophets and made him the Lord of Mankind and declared
    incomplete the Faith that consists in witnessing the Unity,
    which is saying, ‘There is no god except God,’ so long as there
    is not joined that of witnessing to the Apostle, which is
    saying ‘Mohammed is the Apostle of God.’ And He made obligatory
    upon the creation belief in Him, as to all which He narrated
    concerning the things of this world and the next. And then He
    would not accept the faith of a creature, so long as he did not
    believe in that which the Prophet narrated concerning things
    after death. The first of these is the question of Munkar and
    Nakir; these are two awful and terrible beings who will cause
    the creature to sit up in his grave, complete, both soul and
    body; and they will ask him, ‘Who is thy Lord, and what is thy
    religion (_din_), and who is thy Prophet?’ They are the two
    testers in the grave and their questioning is the first testing
    after death. And that he should believe in the punishment of
    the grave—that it is a Verity and that its judgment upon the
    body and the soul is just, according to what God wills. And
    that he should believe in the Balance—it with the two scales
    and the tongue, the magnitude of which is like unto the stages
    of the heavens and the earth. In it, deeds are weighed by the
    power of God Most High; and its weights in that day will be
    the weight of motes and mustard seeds, to show the exactitude
    of its justice. The leaves of the good deeds will be placed in
    a beautiful form in the scale of light; and then the Balance
    will be weighed down by them according to the measure of their
    degree with God, by the grace of God. And the leaves of evil
    deeds will be cast in a vile form into the scale of darkness,
    and the Balance will be light with them, through the justice of
    God. And that he should believe that the Bridge (_as-Sirat_)
    is a Verity; it is a bridge stretched over the back of Hell
    (_Jahannam_), sharper than a sword and finer than a hair. The
    feet of the unbelievers slip upon it, by the decree of God,
    and fall with them into the Fire. But the feet of believers
    stand firm upon it, by the grace of God, and so they pass into
    the Abiding Abode. And that he should believe in the Tank
    (_Hawdh_), to which the people shall go down, the Tank of
    Mohammed from which the believers shall drink before entering
    the Garden and after passing the Bridge. Whoever drinks of it a
    single draught will never thirst again thereafter. Its breadth
    is a journey of a month; its water is whiter than milk and
    sweeter than honey; around it are ewers in numbers like the
    stars of heaven; into it flow two canals from _Al-Kawthar_
    (Koran 108). And that he should believe in the Reckoning
    and in the distinctions between men in it, him with whom it
    will go hard in the Reckoning and him to whom compassion
    will be shown therein, and him who enters the Garden without
    reckoning,—these are the honoured (_muqarrab_). God Most
    High will ask whomsoever He will of the prophets, concerning
    the carrying of His message, and whomsoever He will of the
    unbelievers, concerning the rejection of the messengers; and
    He will ask the innovators (_Mubtadiʾs_) concerning the Sunna;
    and the Moslems concerning works. And that he should believe
    that the attestors of God’s Unity (_muwahhids_) will be brought
    forth from the Fire, after vengeance has been taken on them, so
    that there will not remain in Hell an attestor of God’s Unity.
    And that he should believe in the intercession (_shafaʾa_)
    of the prophets, next of the learned (_ʿulama_), next of the
    martyrs, next of the rest of the believers—each according to
    his dignity and rank with God Most High. And he who remains of
    the believers, and has no intercessor, shall be brought forth
    of the grace of God, whose are Might and Majesty. So there
    shall not abide eternally in the Fire a single believer, but
    whoever has in his heart the weight of a single grain of faith
    shall be brought forth therefrom. And that he should confess
    the excellence of the Companions—May God be well pleased with
    them—and their rank; and that the most excellent of mankind,
    after the Prophet is Abu Bakr, next Umar, next Uthman, next
    Ali—May God be well pleased with them; And that he should think
    well of all the Companions and should praise them like as he
    praises God, whose are Might and Majesty, and His Apostles. All
    this is that which has been handed down in tradition from the
    Prophet and in narratives from the followers. He who confesses
    all this, relying upon it, is of the People of the Truth and
    the Company of the Sunna, and hath separated himself from the
    band of error and the sect of innovation (_bidʾa_). So we ask
    from God perfection of certainty and firm standing in the Faith
    (_din_) for us and for all Moslems through His compassion.—Lo!
    He is the Most Compassionate!—and may the blessing of God be
    upon our Lord Mohammed and upon every chosen creature.”

The above is Doctor Macdonald’s careful translation of what Al-Ghazali
taught was involved when Moslems say: _There is no God but Allah, and
Mohammed is Allah’s Apostle._ Surely he gave this shortest of all creeds
its full significance and value.

It is necessary, however, not only to see in it the faith of Al-Ghazali
but his credulity as well, if we desire to understand the man and
his times. Once his early scepticism was overcome, he was always and
everywhere an orthodox Moslem, and therefore swallowed the Traditions
and the Koran apparently without any philosophic doubt. He believed that
Mohammed was the greatest of all the prophets, and that, so he says, “God
has established Mohammed’s prophetic character by miracles, such as the
splitting of the moon, and the praising of him by stones, the gushing
out of water from between his fingers. One of the greatest miracles,
proving his divine mission, is the Koran, for none of the Arabs were able
to produce anything like it. Another sign of his prophetic character
is his being able to foretell things which are to come to pass, such
as his victorious entry into Mecca, the defeat of the Greeks and their
subsequent victories.” (See the special chapter in the _Ihya_ on this
subject.)

He was a predestinarian in the fullest sense. In one place he writes:
“When God Almighty let His hands pass over the back of Adam and gathered
men into His two hands, He placed some of them in His right hand and the
others in His left; then He opened both His hands before Adam, and Adam
looked at them and saw them like imperceptible atoms. Then God said:
‘These are destined for Paradise and these are destined for hell-fire.’
He then asked them: ‘Am I not your Lord?’ And they replied: ‘Certainly,
we testify that Thou art our Lord.’ God then asked Adam and the angels to
be witnesses to the act; after this God replaced them into the loins of
Adam. They were at that time purely spiritual beings without bodies. He
then caused them to die, but gathered them and kept them in a receptacle
near His throne. When the germ of a new being is placed in the womb of
the mother, it remains there till its body is sufficiently developed; the
soul in the same is then dead yet. When God Almighty breathes into the
spirit, He restores to it its most precious part of which it had been
deprived while preserved in the receptacle near the throne. This is the
first death and the second life. Then God places man in this world till
he has reached the term fixed for him.”

The great Mystic was also superstitious. Some of his books deal with
magical formulæ taken from the Koran and the medicinal use of its text
or of the names of God. One of the most celebrated magic squares used on
amulets, etc., is called the “Square of Al-Ghazali” or _Al-Buduh_. It may
interest in conclusion to give an account of this form of magic, approved
by Al-Ghazali, because it is one of the things by which he is best known
among the masses in the world of Islam.

In the older Arabic books on magic this formula plays a comparatively
minor part; but after it was taken up by Al-Ghazali and cited in his
_Munkidh_ (pp. 46 and 50 of ed. of Cairo, 1303) as an inexplicable,
but certain assistance in cases of difficult labour, it came to be
universally known as “the three-fold talisman, or seal, or table of
Al-Ghazali” (_al-wakf_, _al-khatam_, _al-jadwal_, _al-muthallath
lil-Ghazali_) and finally has become the starting point for the whole
“Science of Letters” (_ʿIlm ul-huruf_) (_e. g._, Cf. Al-Buni’s Shems ul
Muʿarif, A. H. 622). Al-Ghazali is said to have developed the formula,
under divine inspiration (_ilham_), from the combinations of letters
which open Suras xix. and xlii. of the Koran, and which by themselves are
also used as talismans.[55] Others trace the formula back to Adam, from
whom it passed down to Al-Ghazali.[56]

For the popular mind _Buduh_ has become a Jinn whose services can be
secured by writing his name either in letters or numbers. The uses of
the word are most varied to invoke both good and bad fortune. It is used
against menorrhagia, against pains in the stomach, to render oneself
invisible, against temporary impotence, etc. Lane’s Cairo magician also
used it with his ink mirror (“Modern Egyptians,” chap. xii.). We find
the same in magical treatises. It is also engraved upon jewels and metal
plates or rings which are carried as permanent talismans, and it is
inscribed at the beginning of books as a preservative. But by far the
most common use is to ensure the arrival of letters and packages.[57]
No letter from one pious Moslem to another is ever posted in the Near
East without putting the figure 8642 in Arabic on the outside of the
envelope where it is sealed. And one may see thousands of children in
Egypt who have never heard of Al-Ghazali and cannot read the letters of
his name wearing his magic square on lead or silver amulet to protect
them from the hideous power of the Child-Witch (Um-as-Subyan). In the
Azhar University men study his creed but in the villages they follow
his credulity and to all the _fellahin_ of Egypt _Buduh_ has become a
guardian Angel!

    +---+---+---+
    | 4 | 9 | 2 |
    +---+---+---+
    | 3 | 5 | 7 |
    +---+---+---+
    | 8 | 1 | 6 |
    +---+---+---+

Each letter stands for the number as indicated.

    +---+---+---+
    | ‎‏د‏‎ | ‎‏ط‏‎ | ‎‏ب‏‎ |
    +---+---+---+
    | ‎‏ج‏‎ | ‎‏ه‏‎ | ‎‏ز‏‎ |
    +---+---+---+
    | ‎‏ح‏‎ | ‎‏ا‏‎ | ‎‏و‏‎ |
    +---+---+---+




VI

His Writings

    “I saw the Prophet in a dream, and he was contending with Moses
    and Jesus regarding the superiority of excellence of the Imam
    Al-Ghazali, and saying to them, ‘Have you had in your sects
    such a learned and righteous man?’ alluding to Al-Ghazali,
    and they both replied, ‘No.’ The Shaikh, the Imam, one
    acquainted with God, the Master, the support of religious law
    and truth, Abu’l-ʾAbbas al-Mursi said, when mention was made
    of Al-Ghazali, ‘Testimony has been already borne to his great
    and extreme veracity, and it is sufficient for you (to know)
    that it was he regarding whom the Prophet contended with Moses
    and Jesus, _and to whose great and extreme veracity the most
    truthful have borne testimony_.’”

                                    —_Ad-Damiri’s Hayat al-Hayawan._

    “Verily I saw in the Gospel of Jesus (on him be peace) that he
    said: From the moment the dead is placed on the bier until he
    rests on the edge of the open grave God Most High asks of him
    forty questions.”

                  —_Al-Ghazali in Risalat Ayyuha ’l-walad (sec. 5)._


VI

HIS WRITINGS

More by far is known of Al-Ghazali from his writings than from the
records of his life. The meagre facts of the biographers and even the
spelling of his name, as we have seen, are disputed. His pen, however,
left so large a legacy that many of his works are still found only in
rare manuscripts, and have never been published. Moslem writers mention
ninety-nine works, and Brockelmann in his “History of Arabic Literature”
catalogues sixty-nine which are still in existence. They include systems
of theology, eschatology, works on philosophy, lectures on mysticism, on
ethics, and on canon law.

Many have assigned to Al-Ghazali the highest position among all Moslem
writers. Ismael Ibn Mohammed Al Hadrami says: “Mohammed the son of
Abdullah was the Prince of all the Prophets; Mohammed the son of Idris
Al-Shafiʾ was the Prince of Imams; but Mohammed the son of Mohammed, the
son of Mohammed Al-Ghazali, was the Prince of Writers.”

We have interesting evidence of Al-Ghazali’s position as a writer even
in his own day in the precious relic shown in our illustration. In
the Arabic Museum at Cairo there is a _maqlama_ or pen-case which once
belonged to Al-Ghazali. It was presented to the Museum by M. Kyticas
and is made of brass overlaid with silver. It bears the following
inscription: “_Made for the library of our Master, the most great and
noble Imam, our revered Leader, the Mouthpiece of verity, the greatest
Scholar of the world, the King of wise men, the Stay of all living, the
Treasury of truth, the most illustrious among his contemporaries, the
Restorer of religion_, [an illegible word] _Hujjat ul-Islam, Mohammed
Al-Ghazali._”

[Illustration: Pen case of Al Ghazali, made of brass inlaid with silver,
preserved in the Arab Museum, Cairo.]

This bronze is the oldest piece of damascened metal work and the only
example of that epoch with _naskhi_ inscription in the possession of the
Museum. That the case was not made at a later period and presented to
Al-Ghazali’s library _after_ his death is evident from the fact that it
was the custom to present a book or celestial globe to a library, but
not a pen-case or even an inkstand. Then, too, the word “_al-marhum_,”
meaning “deceased,” does not appear on it as it does on other objects
which were offered in memory of a deceased person. An objection to the
authenticity of the bronze is the use of silver in a pen-case designed
to be used by a Sufi doctor pledged in some measure to an ascetic life.
But this objection may be answered by stating that the case was not made
to the order of Al-Ghazali personally, but by his disciples in order to
obtain his good-will and patronage.[58]

We need not, moreover, be surprised at the apparent lack of modesty
which the inscription on the pen-case indicates. Judging from other
instances of this period, Al-Ghazali himself might well have written the
inscription.

An almost complete list of Al-Ghazali’s writings as well as of the
translations of his works into other languages, especially Hebrew,
Latin, French, German, and English, is given in the appendix.[59] Before
we speak of some of his more important works a summary will interest
the reader. The _Jawahir al-Koran_ (Jewels of the Koran) contains
observations on some of the verses of the Koran which have special value;
the _ʾAqida_ is a statement of the articles of the Moslem faith, and
was published by Pococke in his Specimen; the Precious Pearl (Al-Durrat
Al-Fakhira) is a treatise on the last judgment and the end of the world,
_i. e._, his eschatology—and has been translated and published by L.
Gautier. The morality and theology of the mystics are codified in the
_Ihya ʿulum id-din_ (Revivification of the Religious Sciences). The
_Mizan Al-ʿamal_ (The Balance of Works) has been translated into Hebrew
by Ibrahim bin Hasdai of Barcelona, and published by Goldenthal. The
_Kimiya as-saʾada_ (Alchemy of Happiness) is a popular lecture founded
on mysticism; this work which was originally written in Persian, has
been twice translated into English, by H. A. Homes in 1873 and more
recently by Claud Field. _Ayyuha ’l-walad_ (O Child!) is a celebrated
moral treatise, which has been translated into German and published
by Hammer-Purgstall. Among works on jurisprudence, his treatises on
Shafiʾite law have earned great reputation in the Moslem world; his
_Basit_, _Wasit_, and _Wajiz_ are all abridgments of them. In the domain
of philosophy, the _Tahafut al-Falasifa_ (Collapse of the Philosophers)
is an attack on the adherents of the Greek Philosophy; it has been edited
by DeBoer. The _Maqasid al-Falasifa_ (Aims of the Philosophers) is a sort
of introduction to the above. The text has been published by G. Beer,
and a Latin translation by Gondisalvi is in existence, which was printed
in Venice in 1506. _Al-Munqidh min ad-Dalal_ (The Deliverer from Error),
written after the author commenced his life as a teacher at Nishapur for
the second time, describes the development of his philosophy. It was
translated and published by Schmolders in his “Essay on the Schools of
Philosophy Among the Arabs”; a second and greatly improved translation
was published in the _Journal Asiatique_ for 1877, by the learned savant,
Barbier de Meynard. More recently it appeared in English under the title
“The Confessions of Al-Ghazali.” It is one of his shortest but most
famous books and can be compared with the “Confessions” of St. Augustine,
or John Bunyan’s “Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners.” Several of
Al-Ghazali’s numerous works are very brief, in the shape of epistles or
tractates.

Among his shorter works the following may be mentioned: _Al-ʾAdab fi
Din_, a short treatise on the ethics of politeness, prepared for the use
of his pupils. It speaks of the ideal pupil, the ideal teacher, of the
ethics of eating, drinking, marriage and the religious life. A smaller
work already mentioned is the _Risala Ayyuh’ Al-Walad_ (“O Child!”). In
it he defines faith and works and distinguishes between them. A curious
passage occurs in the introduction which reflects on Al-Ghazali’s
accuracy of statement, or at least raises the question as to which
“Gospel” he refers to. He says: “O my child, live as you please for you
are already dead; love whom you wish, for you are bound to be separated;
and do what you will, for you are sure to be judged for it. Verily I saw
in the Gospel of Jesus (upon Him be prayers and peace) that He said,
‘From the hour in which the dead is put upon the bier until the time when
he rests on the edge of the grave God will ask him forty questions, the
first of which is, O my servant, you have purified yourself to appear
before men many years and not for one hour have you purified yourself
for my gates, and every day a voice was sounded in your ears saying,
“What you do for others why do you not do for me who surrounds you with
my mercy!” but you were deaf and not willing to hear.’”

In his “Alchemy of Happiness” there is a beautiful chapter on “Know
Thyself.” The parable there used regarding man’s soul and the enemies
that lay siege against it reminds one very much of Bunyan’s “Holy War.”
The shortest of his works, as far as I am aware, is called _Al-Qawaʿid
Al-ʾAshara_ (The Ten Articles); this has been frequently reprinted. It
consists of ten principles of faith and conduct, and is scarcely longer
than an ordinary letter. Of a similar character is _Risalat-ut-Tair_
the parable of the birds. His most celebrated treatise on ethics and
conduct is entitled _Mizan ul ʿAmal_. It might be compared to the book
of Ecclesiastes or the first chapters of the book of Proverbs. In the
introduction Al-Ghazali shows the folly of those who neglect to secure
the happiness of their immortal souls as well as the peril of those who
despise faith in the world to come. The true way of happiness consists in
knowing the right and doing it. The soul is a unit and its various powers
are knit together and are interdependent. The path of the mystic unites
true faith with true practice. He also speaks of the possibility of
change of character through religious devotion and mentions the virtues
that are to be cultivated and the vices to be shunned on this pathway to
God and to true happiness.

To emphasize the importance of life with its brevity and the supreme
importance of eternity Al-Ghazali says: “Suppose we imagine that the
whole world is filled with dust and that a little bird should come and
snatch up one atom of dust every thousand years. We know that there
would be an end of its task, but nothing would have been taken away from
the everlasting character of that eternity which has no end.” Although
the moral teaching of this book is very noble, it is after all based
entirely on the principle of salvation by works. There is no hint of the
possibility of the transformation of character through regeneration of
the heart, nor is the way pointed to the victorious life by overcoming
temptation through a power that is not our own.

Of all his writings none is celebrated more justly than his greatest
work “The Revival of Religious Sciences” (_Ihya ʿulum id Din_). It is
a veritable encyclopædia of Moslem teaching and ethics and covers the
whole range of Moslem thought. Many editions of this work have been
printed and commentaries written on it, the most celebrated of which
is by Mohammed-uz-Zubeidi Al-Murtadha, in ten large volumes. The work
itself consists of four volumes of ten books each and has a total of
over one thousand closely printed pages. Although widely read in its
original form, popular demand has called forth several abbreviated
compendia of the work. One of them entitled “A Homily for Believers,” by
Mohammed Jamal-ud-Din of Damascus, is used as a text-book on Islam in the
Theological Seminary of the American Mission in Cairo.

The first part of the original work is entitled “Things that pertain to
worship”; the second part, “Things that pertain to practice”; the third
part, “Things that destroy the soul,” _i. e._, the vices; the fourth
part, “Things that deliver the soul,” _i. e._, the virtues. The contents
are as follows:

                    “THINGS THAT PERTAIN TO WORSHIP”

    I. _The Book of Knowledge_, which has seven divisions:

        1. The Benefits of Learning.

        2. What Kind of Knowledge is Forbidden and Permitted.

        3. Theological Learning and Nomenclature.

        4. Conditions of Debate and Controversy.

        5. The Relation of Teacher and Pupil.

        6. The Dangers of Learning.

        7. The Mind and its Uses.

    II. _The Book of Dogma_, which has four divisions:

        1. The Moslem Creed.

        2. Degrees of Faith.

        3. God, His Being, Attributes, Work.

        4. Faith and Islam.

    III. _The Book of the Mysteries of Purity_, which has three
    divisions:

        1. Purification from Unclean Objects.

        2. Purification from Unclean States.

        3. Purification from Unclean Matters that cling to
        the Body (finger-nails, ears, etc.).

    IV. _The Book of the Mysteries of Prayer_, which has seven
    divisions:

        1. The Benefits of Prayer.

        2. Outward Observance of Prayer.

        3. Conditions of Prayer.

        4. The Imam.

        5. Friday Prayers.

        6. Miscellaneous Matters.

        7. Special Prayers.

    V. _The Book of the Mysteries of Almsgiving_, which has four
    divisions:

        1. Kinds of Alms.

        2. Conditions of Giving.

        3. To Whom.

        4. How they are Observed.

    VI. _The Book of the Mysteries of Fasting_, which has three
    divisions:

        1. Its Necessity.

        2. Its Mysteries.

        3. Obedience through Fasting.

    VII. _The Book of the Mysteries of the Pilgrimage_, which has
    three divisions:

        1. Its Benefits and Character.

        2. The Order of Procedure.

        3. Its Inward Significance.

    VIII. _The Book of the Perusal of the Koran._

    IX. _The Book of Zikr and Prayer._

    X. _The Book of the Night Meditation._

                   “THINGS THAT PERTAIN TO PRACTICE”

    I. The Ethics of Eating and Drinking.

    II. The Ethics of Marriage.

    III. The Ethics of Trade.

    IV. Things that are Allowed and Forbidden.

    V. Ethics of Friendship and Conversation.

    VI. The Life of Seclusion.

    VII. The Ethics of Journeying.

    VIII. The Ethics of Music and Poetry.

    IX. On Favours and Offenses.

    X. The Ethics of True Living and the Virtues of the Prophet.

                     “THINGS THAT DESTROY THE SOUL”

    I. The Wonders of the Heart.

    II. The Exercise of the Soul.

    III. The Dangers of the Two Desires, namely, of the Appetite
    and of Lust.

    IV. The Evils of the Tongue.

    V. The Evils of Anger and Envy.

    VI. On Despising the World.

    VII. On Despising Property and Greed.

    VIII. On Despising the Love of Honour and Hypocrisy.

    IX. On Despising Vanities.

                     “THINGS THAT DELIVER THE SOUL”

    I. The Book of Repentance.

    II. The Book of Patience and Thankfulness.

    III. The Book of Fear.

    IV. The Book of Poverty and Asceticism.

    V. The Book of the Unity of God.

    VI. The Book of Love.

    VII. The Book of Good Intent and Sincerity.

    VIII. The Book of Self-examination.

    IX. The Book of Meditation.

    X. The Book of the Remembrance of Death.

Especially the third and fourth parts of his great work show us
Al-Ghazali as a mystic and a preacher of righteousness. His ten books
on “Things that deliver the soul” furnish material from which it would
not be difficult to collect a beautiful anthology or a daily calendar of
spiritual thoughts. Such a rosary of pearls from Al-Ghazali’s works might
well be used for devotion by Christians as well as by Moslems.

[Illustration: A facsimile page of the Ihya (Vol. II, page 180, Cairo
Ed.). It gives a diagram of the prayer _kibla_ and the rules to be
observed in facing it correctly.]

Another most interesting book is that on the names of God, entitled
_Al-Maksad ul-Asna Sharh-Asmaʾ-Allah ul Husna_, “The Highest Aim: the
Explanation of the Beautiful Names of God.” The book is divided into
three parts of which the first deals philosophically with the meaning of
the word “name” and its distinction from the naming of the thing and the
thing named itself: also how it is possible for God to have many names
and yet to be one essence. The second part of the book is the longest
and treats of the ninety-nine names of God in order showing how they are
comprehended in the seven attributes and the one essence. The third part
is brief and shows that there are really more than ninety-nine names, but
that this was the number fixed upon for good reasons. And finally there
is a section telling how God may and may not be described.

Al-Ghazali teaches in this book _that the imitation of God’s attributes
is the highest happiness for the believer_. There are three degrees
in the knowledge of God, and in this respect he says: “The virtues of
the righteous are the faults of the Saints”; by which he means that
the nearer we approach to God the more perfect is our standard of
character. The three degrees of knowledge are (1) intellectual, (2) that
of admiration and attempted imitation, (3) that of actual acquirements
of God’s attributes such as the angels. Nearness to God is by rank and
degree, not in regard to position or place. He quotes with approval the
famous saying of Junaid: “No one knows God save God Himself Most High,
and therefore even to the best of His creatures He has only revealed His
names, in which He hides Himself.” He says that two statements are true
in regard to God and the believer. The true believer must say, “I know
nothing but God,” and “I know nothing of God.”

The last book Al-Ghazali wrote was the _Minhaj al-ʾAbidin_ or “Guide of
True Worshippers.” It is said to have been written for those who could
not understand the _Ihya_ and deals with the creed and ritual of Islam
from the standpoint of the mystic. Our illustration shows in facsimile
the first page of this celebrated work from a recent Cairo edition. On
the margin of the text we have the Beginner’s Guide, already spoken of.
These two works of Al-Ghazali are very popular and have recently had an
increasing circulation.

The _Minhaj_ shows that Al-Ghazali at the close of his life had adopted
the vocabulary of the mystics even for popular teaching. The various
chapters are called “stages” in the progress of the soul towards
salvation and peace. The first stage is that of knowledge, then follows
repentance, a list of the hindrances on the road to God, things that
delay the soul in its onward progress, such as the world and its
allurements, the flesh, the devil, the senses. Other hindrances are the
cares of gaining a living, the perplexities and troubles of life, while
the last stages in the road of the mystic are those of praise to God
under all circumstances, and earnest endeavour to attain to the reality
of the experience of His presence.

So difficult is the road which Al-Ghazali describes that he says: “Some
seekers can only finish these stages in seventy years, some in twenty,
some in ten. Others there are, however, whose souls are so enlightened,
so free from the care and perplexity of the world, that they finish the
journey and arrive at the goal in a year, a month, what do I say, in
an hour; so that they awaken like the Companions of the Cave, and the
change they see in themselves and those about them is to them as a dream.”

His teaching on prayer as given in the _Ihya_ certainly rises very
high above that of the ritualist who puts all his attention on the
punctiliousness of outward observance. “Prayers are of three degrees, of
which the first are those that are simply spoken with the lips. Prayers
are of the second kind when with difficulty, and only by a most resolute
effort, the soul is able to fix its thoughts on divine things without
being disturbed by evil imaginations; they are of the third kind when
one finds it difficult to turn away the mind from dwelling on divine
things. But it is the very marrow of prayer when He who is invoked takes
possession of the soul of the suppliant, and the soul of him who prays
is absorbed into God, to whom he prays, and, his prayer ceasing, all
consciousness of self has departed, and to such a degree that all thought
whatsoever of the praying is felt as a veil between the soul and God.
This state is called by the Sufis ‘absorption,’ for the reason that the
man is so absorbed that he takes no thought of his body, or of anything
that happens externally, or even of the movements of his own soul, but
is first engaged in going towards his Lord, and finally is wholly in his
Lord. If even the thought occurs that he is absorbed in the Absolute it
is a blemish, for that absorption only is worthy of the name, though they
will be called, as I well know, but foolish babbling by raw theologians,
are yet by no means without significance. For consider: The condition of
which I speak resembles that of a person who loves any other object, such
as wealth, honour, or pleasure. We see such persons so carried away with
their love, and others with their anger, that they do not hear one who
speaks to them, nor see those passing before their eyes. Nay, so absorbed
are they in their passion that they do not perceive their absorption; you
necessarily turn it away from that which is the object of it.”

Elsewhere Al-Ghazali says: “The commencement of this life is the going to
God; then follows the finding Him, when the absorption takes place. This
at first is momentary, as the lightning swiftly glancing upon the eye,
but afterwards, confirmed by use, it introduces the soul into a higher
world, where, the most pure essential essence meeting it, fills the
soul with the images of the spiritual world, while the majesty of Deity
discovers itself.”

The evident sincerity and the moral earnestness of Al-Ghazali shown in
his works and in the extracts which we have quoted, surely explains
in a large degree why his influence has been so deep and permanent,
far greater than that of the merely intellectual philosophers, such as
Averroes. While he discouraged scholastic philosophy, he encouraged
moral philosophy. The reader will remember how he carried a book of
ethics with him on his journeys. After his death several famous ethical
treatises were composed which derived much from him. Claud Field says
“the most important of these is the ‘Akhlaq-i-Jalali,’ by Jalaluddin
Asaʾad Aldawani, which has been ably translated into English by Mr. W.
F. Thompson. The ‘Akhlaq-i-Jalali’ itself is largely a translation into
Persian from the Arabic, the original of which appeared in the tenth
century under the name of ‘Kitab-ut-Taharat.’ Two centuries after it was
translated into Persian by Abu Nasr, and named ‘Akhlaq Nasiri,’ enriched
with some important additions from Avicenna. In the fifteenth century
it assumed a still further improved form under its present name, the
‘Akhlaq-i-Jalali.’”[60]

That Al-Ghazali was a careful student of nature is evident in all his
writings. Those portions of the Koran which deal with natural theology
and the proof of God’s existence from the starry heavens, from the
fertile ground, the animal creation, and the sea with its terrors,
especially seem to appeal to him. One of his books is entitled _Al Hikmat
fi Makhlukat Allah_ (The Wisdom of God Shown in the Marvels of Creation).
It is one of his shorter writings but full of beautiful passages on the
glory of the starry heavens, the earth and the sea, and the four primal
elements. One long chapter is devoted to embryology and the physical
wonders of the human frame. Another is on birds, another on quadrupeds
and on fishes. The conclusion of the whole treatise is the argument from
design, for the goodness and greatness of the Creator as shown in His
works. What he says in regard to the benefits to be obtained from gazing
into the starry vault may be compared with David’s words in the eighth
and the nineteenth Psalms. Says Al-Ghazali: “To look up into the vault of
heaven drives away anxiety, removes the whisperings of Satan, takes away
idle fear, reminds us of God, brings the heart to magnify Him, banishes
evil thoughts, cures pessimism, comforts the passionate, delights the
lover, and it is the best _Kibla_ for those who call to God in prayer.”

Al-Ghazali was also a dogmatic theologian and controversialist. He wrote
a commentary on the Koran in forty volumes, never printed; and a dozen
books against various heretics, including one entitled: “The Best Reply
to Those Who Have Tampered with the Gospel.” Al-Ghazali, who was himself
cursed for alleged heresy, is memorable among the theologians of Islam
in that by his breadth of sympathy he forbade the cursing of Yazid, the
notorious slayer of Hussein, Mohammed’s grandson, and gave his opinion in
these words: “It is forbidden to curse a Moslem: Yazid was a Moslem. It
is not certain that he slew Al-Husain, and it is forbidden to think ill
of a Moslem. We cannot be certain that he ordered his death; really we
cannot be certain of the cause of the death of any great man, especially
at such a distance of time. We have also to remember the party spirit
and false statements in this particular case. Again, if he did kill him,
he is not an unbeliever because of that; he is only disobedient to God.
Again, he may have repented before he died. Further, to abstain from
cursing is no crime. No one will be asked if he ever cursed Satan; if he
has cursed him he may be asked, Why? The only accursed ones of whom we
know are those who die infidels.”[61]

Among his books against the philosophers we must mention three which are
closely related to one another. They are the _Maqasid-ul-Falasifa_, a
statement of the true teachings of the philosophers and a presentation
of their views of the world; the _Tahafut ul Falasifa_ which overthrows
their views and shows that they are untenable to those who would follow
Islam with heart and mind; the _Qawaʾid_, which shows the truths that
must be built up to take the place of the errors of the philosophers. In
the first-named book, according to Macdonald, he “smites the philosophers
hip and thigh, turns their own weapons against them and goes to the
extreme of intellectual scepticism; seven hundred years before Hume he
cuts the bond of causality with the edge of his dialectic and proclaims
that we can know nothing of cause or effect, but simply that one thing
follows another.”

Al-Ghazali’s great work “The Revival of Religious Sciences,” caused
great scandal in Andalusia. There the intolerance of the learned passed
all bounds because of the narrowness of their views. Their theology was
limited to minute knowledge of Canon Law. They had no place for the
religion which Ghazali preached, which was personal and passionate, a
religion of the heart. When he attacked contemporary theologians busy
with questions of legality and the externals of religion, he touched
these pharisees of the law at the quick and they not only squirmed but
screamed loudly. According to Dozy, “the Kady of Cordova, Ibn Hamdin,
declared that any man who read Al-Ghazali’s book was an infidel ripe for
damnation, and he drew up a _fatwa_ condemning all copies of the book to
the flames. This _fatwa_, signed by the _Fakihs_ of Cordova, was formally
approved by ʾAli. Al-Ghazali’s book was accordingly burnt in Cordova
and all the other cities of the Empire, and possession of a copy was
interdicted on pain of death and confiscation of property.”

But this opinion was not shared by Moslems elsewhere. In his lifetime and
especially after his death his works against philosophy and his great
exposition of Islam found ever larger circles of readers and commentators.

He has been accused, and not without good reason, both by Moslem writers
and European critics, of carelessness and inaccuracy in his quotations
and references to other books.[62] One of the charges brought against him
by his assailants is that he falsified Tradition. Macdonald’s judgment
is very charitable when he says that “he quoted from memory too freely,
because he was a man of too large a calibre to watch his quotations and
they were loose to the end of his life.”

As-Subqi in his Tabakat-ash-Shafaʾiya al Kubra devotes a special section
to what is entitled “A List of all the Traditions given by Al-Ghazali
in his _Ihya_ which have no _isnad_, or pedigree, _i. e._, Traditions
_quoted by him as authoritative and yet which from the standpoint of
Moslem criticism are on this account absolutely worthless_.” This section
of the book referred to covers many pages and by actual count I found
over six hundred Traditions each catalogued by reference to the chapter
in which they occur. Now we have no reason to doubt that As-Subqi (d.
771 A. H.) was an admirer of Al-Ghazali and esteemed his teaching, yet
what shall we say when in this collection of the lives of the saints so
strong an indictment is made of Al-Ghazali’s inaccuracy by one of his own
disciples?

When reading this collection of “true sayings” of the Prophet (which are
after all often ascribed to him without any authority or foundation)
one is shocked both at the credulity and the lack of love for veracity
in this greatest of all Moslem apologists. If even Al-Ghazali handled
Tradition so carelessly as to ascribe to Mohammed so much that is
altogether puerile, fabulous and often immoral, what confidence can we
put in other and later tradition-mongers and how can we clear Al-Ghazali
from the charge of using pious falsehood?

We add another fact of great interest in regard to his writings.
Al-Ghazali exercised a commanding influence on Jewish thought in the
Middle Ages. In the appendix is a list of some of the translations of
his books made in Hebrew. Jewish students of philosophy, including
Maimonides, drew many of their theories from the _Maqasid_ and his other
works. Al-Ghazali’s attacks on philosophy were imitated by Judah ha-Levy
in his _Cuzari_; but it was chiefly his ethical teaching rather than
through his philosophy that Al-Ghazali attracted the Jewish thinkers.
Broyde says, “He approached the ethical ideal of Judaism to such an
extent that some supposed him to be actually drifting in that direction,
and his works were eagerly studied and used by Jewish writers. Abraham
ibn Ezra borrowed from Al-Ghazali’s _Mizan al ʿAmal_ his comparison
between the limbs of the human body and the functionaries of a king,
and used it for the subject of his beautiful admonition _Yeshene Leb_;
Abraham ibn Dawud borrowed from the same work the parable used by
Al-Ghazali to prove the difference in value between various branches of
science; and Simon Duran cites in his _Keshet_ a passage from the _Mozene
ha-ʾIyyunim_, which he calls _Mozene ha-Hokmah_.”[63]

The translations of his works into Hebrew were made as early as the
thirteenth century. Not less than _eleven_ Hebrew commentaries are known
on the _Maqasid_. “Johanan Alemanno recommends Ghazali’s hermeneutic
methods, and compares the order and graduation of lights in Ghazali’s
theory with those of the theory of the cabalists.”

In regard to science, Al-Ghazali’s views were naturally those of his
contemporaries. His world was built on the Ptolemaic system. There are
four elements only. Existence has three modes: the world of sense, the
world of God’s eternal decree, and the world of ideals or of God’s power.
In dreams and visions we are in contact with the two other worlds.
Al-Ghazali avoids the difficulties of concrete Moslem teaching by this
method. There may be things which are real and actual and yet do not
belong to the world of sense.[64]

Doctor Macdonald admirably summarizes his influence on Islam as
four-fold. “First of all he led men back from mere scholastic dogma to
a living contact with the Koran and the Traditions as the true source
of Islam. He might be called a Biblical theologian in our modern use
of the word, understanding by ‘Bible’ always the Moslem bible, namely
the Koran. Nearly every paragraph of his _Ihya_ begins with a Koran
quotation, and his interpretation of the book is not a slavish following
of the earlier commentators but a spiritual interpretation of the text.”

“In the second place he reintroduced into Islam the element of fear. In
the earliest days, as for example in the Koran itself, the terrors of the
day of judgment and the horrors of hell operated in order to lead men to
repentance. Al-Ghazali emphasized this part of the Moslem teaching to the
utmost, witness his little book _Al-Durra al-Fakhira_, which has to this
day great acceptance among pious Moslems.”

In the third place mysticism, already existing in Islam, but looked
upon in many quarters as heretical, received its birthright through
Al-Ghazali’s life and teachings, and from his day on held an assured
position in orthodox Islam.

Lastly, he brought philosophy within the range of the ordinary mind,
warning the people against its dangers as well as showing them its
fundamental principles and above all illustrating through his writings
how true philosophy and true Islam are not contradictory. In this respect
he resembles Raymond Lull who also desired to use philosophy as the
handmaid of Christianity.[65]

Macdonald thinks that of these four phases of his work and influence the
first and the third were undoubtedly the most important. These alone made
him a reformer of the first rank in the history of Islam.




VII

His Ethics

    “The religion of Christ contains whole fields of morality and
    whole realms of thought which are all but outside the religion
    of Mohammed. It opens humility, purity of heart, forgiveness
    of injuries, sacrifice of self to man’s moral nature; it
    gives scope for toleration, development, boundless progress
    to his mind; its motive power is stronger, even as a friend
    is better than a king and love higher than obedience. Its
    realized ideals in the various paths of human greatness have
    been more commanding, more many-sided, more holy, as Averroes
    is below Newton, Haroun below Alfred, and ʾAli below St. Paul.
    Finally, the ideal life of all is far more elevating, far more
    majestic, far more inspiring even as the life of the founder of
    Mohammedanism is below the life of the Founder of Christianity.”

                           —_“Life of Mohammed,” R. Bosworth Smith._


VII

HIS ETHICS

Martensen defines Christian ethics as “the science of morals conditioned
by Christianity.” But the three fundamental concepts of Christian ethics
are all of them challenged by the teaching of Islam. The Mohammedan idea
of the Highest Good, of Virtue and of the Moral Law are not in accord
with those of Christianity. This is evident both from the character of
Mohammed himself and from his recorded sayings. Ideal virtue is to be
found through imitation of Mohammed. And the moral law is practically
abrogated because of loose views as to its real character, its teaching
and finality. “The ethics of Islam bear the character of an outwardly
and crudely conceived doctrine of righteousness; conscientiousness in
the sphere of the social relations, faithfulness to conviction and to
one’s word, and the bringing of an action into relation to God, are its
bright points; but there is a lack of heart-depth, of a basing of the
moral in love. The highest good is the very outwardly and very sensuously
conceived happiness of the individual.”[66]

This statement needs no proof to those who know Islam from its
original sources, the Koran and Tradition. Professor Margoliouth uses
language which is strong but not unfair when he says in regard to the
saints of the Moslem calendar—that is the companions and followers of
Mohammed—“Those who recount the history of Islam have to lay aside all
ordinary canons of morality, else the picture would have no lights; they
could not write at all if they let themselves be shocked by perfidy or
bloodthirstiness, by cruelty or lust, yet both the Koran and Tradition
forbid the first three, and assign some limits to the fourth.” A stream
cannot rise higher than its source; a tower cannot be broader than its
foundation. The measure of the moral stature of Mohammed is the source
and foundation of all moral ideals in Islam. His conduct is the standard
of character. We need not be surprised, therefore, that the ethical
standard is so low even in Al-Ghazali, although he ofttimes rises high
above the Koran and the Prophet.

In nearly every one of his books on morals the Prophet of Arabia is held
up as the highest ideal of character. In his “Precious Pearl,” however,
there is a passage quoted from a tradition in which he pays this high
tribute to Jesus Christ (page 24, Cairo Edition), “_Go to Jesus, on Him
be peace, for He is the truest of those who were sent as apostles, and
who knew most of God, and the most ascetic in life of them all, and the
most eloquent of all in wisdom, perchance He will intercede for you._”
The quotation, however, refers to the day of resurrection when the
various nations seek God’s favour and forgiveness.

When we consider the age in which Al-Ghazali lived and his Moslem
education in ethics, Macdonald says,[67] “the position of Al-Ghazali is a
simple one. All our laws and theories upon the subject, the analysis of
the qualities of the mind, good and bad, the tracing of hidden defects to
their causes, and the methods of combating these causes,—all these things
[Al-Ghazali teaches] we owe to the saints of God to whom God Himself has
revealed them. Of these there have been many at all times and in all
countries,—God has never left Himself without a witness,—and without them
and their labours and the light which God has vouchsafed to them we could
never know ourselves. Here as everywhere, comes out clearly Al-Ghazali’s
fundamental position that the ultimate source of all knowledge is
revelation from God. It may be major revelation, through accredited
prophets who come forward as teachers, divinely sent and supported by
miracles and by the evident truth of their message appealing to the human
heart; or it may be minor revelation—subsidiary and explanatory—through
the vast body of saints of different grades to whom God has granted
immediate knowledge of Himself. Where the saints leave off, the prophets
begin; and, apart from such teaching, man, even in physical science,
would be groping in the dark.”

But we must add to this clear statement of Al-Ghazali’s theory of ethics,
_lest it be wholly misunderstood_, that the revelation referred to is
the Koran and that “the saints” were the Moslem saints of the early
Caliphate, and their followers.

Moslem doctors of jurisprudence, including Al-Ghazali, define sin as
“a conscious act of a responsible being against known law.” Therefore
sins of ignorance and of childhood are not reckoned as real sin. They
divide sin into “great” and “little” sins. Some say there are seven
great sins: idolatry, murder, false charge of adultery, wasting the
substance of orphans, taking interest on money, desertion from _Jihad_
and disobedience to parents. Others say there are seventeen, and include
wine-drinking, witchcraft and perjury among them. The lack of all
distinction between the ceremonial and the moral law is very evident in
the traditional sayings of Mohammed, which are, of course, at the basis
of ethics. Take one example: “The Prophet, upon him be prayers and peace,
said, One _dirhem_ of usury which a man takes knowing it to be so is
more grievous than thirty-six fornications, and whosoever has done so is
worthy of hell-fire.”

Orthodox Moslems divide sins into greater and lesser. Al-Ghazali quotes
one who said, “There are no greater and lesser sins, but everything
which is contrary to God’s will is a great sin,” but gives Koran
passages contradicting this and then escapes the moral difficulty by
showing that the smaller sins may become great if we continue in them:
“like the dropping of water wearing away a stone”; and “when the servant
of God reckons his sin great, God reckons it small, and when he reckons
it small, then God reckons it great.”

He divides the sins which overcome the heart into four classes: egoistic,
satanic, brutal and cruel. Under the first he puts pride, conceit,
boasting, selfishness, etc.; envy, hatred, deceit, malice, corruption and
unbelief, belong to the second; while greed, gluttony, lust, adultery,
sodomy, theft, and the robbing of orphans are classed as brutal sins; and
anger, passion, abuse, cursing, murder, robbery, etc., are cruel.

Yet in all of Al-Ghazali’s works on ethics and many of his smaller
treatises are on this subject, there is no clear distinction made between
the ritual and the moral law. In fact one word used for ethics in Arabic
(_ʾadab_) refers to propriety of conduct, etiquette, politeness, and
decency in outward behaviour, reverence in the presence of superiors,
rather than to the keeping of the ten commandments or of the principles
that are fundamental to noble character. This becomes very clear when we
study the contents, for example, of one of his shorter books entitled
_Al-ʾAdab fi Din_ (Ethics in Religion).

The book begins by giving the basis of ethical teaching in these words:
“Praise be to God who created us and perfected our creation, and taught
us morals and beautified our morals, and honoured us by sending His
Prophet Mohammed (upon whom may God’s blessing rest), and hath taught
us how to honour him. Truly the most perfect element in character and
the most elevated, and the best of good works, and the most glorious, is
correct behaviour as regards religion, which teaches what a true believer
should know of the work of the Lord of the worlds and the Creator of the
prophets and apostles; and God hath taught us and clearly enlightened us
concerning this in the Koran, and hath given us the example of conduct
in his Prophet Mohammed according to his Traditions. He is our example,
and likewise are his companions and immediate followers. These have shown
us what it is necessary for us to follow in their conduct, which we have
here recorded for all those who would follow.”

The paragraphs or sections of this handbook are entitled: Ethics of the
believer in the presence of God; of the teacher; of the pupil; of those
who hear the Koran read; of the reader; of the school-teacher; of those
who seek to understand Tradition; of the scribe; of the preacher; of
the ascetic; of the nobleman; ethics of sleeping; of night-watching;
of fulfilling a call of nature; of the bath; of washing; of entering
the mosque; of the call to prayer; of prayer; of intercession; of the
Friday sermon; of the feast-days; of conduct during an eclipse; of
conduct during drought; of sickness; of funerals; of almsgiving; of the
rich and the poor; of fasting; of pilgrimage; of the merchant; of the
money-changer; of eating and drinking; of marriage (this has several
subdivisions); of sitting by the wayside; of the child with its parents;
of the parent with the child; of brothers; of neighbours; of the master
with the servant; of the Sultan with his subjects; of the Judge; of
the witness; of the prisoner. The final chapter of this interesting
treatise deals with miscellaneous maxims on polite behaviour under all
circumstances.

A translation of the section on eating, which is about the same length as
the other paragraphs, will give a clear idea of the contents: “One should
wash one’s hands before partaking of food and after, and pronounce the
name of God before beginning to eat, and eat with the right hand. Take
small portions from the dish, chew the food thoroughly, and do not look
into the faces of the other guests while you are eating; nor should you
recline nor eat to excess beyond the demands of hunger; and you should
ask to be excused as soon as you have had enough, so that your guest
may not be embarrassed or any one who has greater need. And one should
eat from the edge of the platter and not from the middle, and wipe his
fingers after the meal, and return praise to God. Nor should one mention
death at dinner for fear of bringing bad luck upon those who are present.”

All this is interesting and important, for the Moslem child, as table
etiquette. Obedience, humility in outward behaviour, reverence in the
mosque, respect “to those above us in age or station,” and many other
social virtues are likewise commended. But the omissions of the Book
surprise us. There is nothing on truth, heart-purity, moral courage or
the nobility of chivalry—_the things that make a man_.

One section of the _Ihya_ (Vol. III, p. 96 ff.) deals with the question
as to when lies are justifiable, and clearly shows that according to
Al-Ghazali, in the realm of truth at least, the end justifies the means.
“Know,” he says, “that a lie is not _haram_ (wrong) in itself, but only
because of the evil conclusions to which it leads the hearer, making
him believe something that is not really the case. Ignorance sometimes
is an advantage, and if a lie causes this kind of ignorance it may be
allowed. It is sometimes a duty to lie. Maimun Ibn Muhran said, ‘A lie
is sometimes better than truth: for instance, if you see a man seeking
for another in order to kill him, what do you reply to the question as to
where he is? Of course you will reply thus, for such a lie is lawful. We
say that the end justifies the means.’

“If lying and truth both lead to a good result, you must tell the truth,
for a lie is forbidden in this case. If a lie is the only way to reach a
good result, it is allowable (_hallal_). A lie is lawful when it is the
only path to duty. For example, if a Moslem flees from an unjust one and
you are asked about him, you are obliged to lie in order to save him.
If the outcome of war, reconciliation between two separated friends, or
the safety of an oppressed depends on a lie, then a lie is allowed. In
all cases we must be careful not to lie when there is no necessity for
it, lest it be _haram_ (wrong). If a wicked person asks a man about his
wealth he has to deny having any; and so if a sultan asks a man about a
crime he has committed, he has to deny it and say, ‘I have not stolen,’
when he did steal; ‘nor done any vice,’ when he has done. The Prophet
said, ‘He who has done a shameful deed must conceal it, for revealing one
disgrace is another disgrace.’ A person must deny the sins of others as
well. Making peace between wives is a duty, even by pretending to each of
them that she is loved the most, and by making promises to please her.

“We must lie when truth leads to unpleasant results, but tell the truth
when it leads to good results. Lying for one’s pleasure, or for increase
of wealth, or for fame is forbidden. One wife must not lie for her
husband to tease another wife. Lying is allowed in persuading children to
go to school; also false promises and false threats.”

We get another view of Al-Ghazali’s ethics in his teaching regarding
education. There is a special section in the _Ihya_ (Vol. III, p. 53)
which deals with the education of boys and the improvement of their
morals. It is not surprising that nothing is said as regards the
education of girls, for even now many Moslem authorities consider it
inadvisable that they should be taught to read and write. The chapter
referred to begins as follows:

“It is most important to know how to bring up a boy, for a boy is a trust
in the hands of his father, and his pure heart is a precious jewel like
a tablet without inscription. It is therefore ready to receive whatever
impression is applied. If he learns to do good and is taught it, he grows
up accordingly, and is happy in this world and the next and his parents
and teachers will have the reward for their action. But if he learns evil
and grows up in neglect like the dumb cattle, he will turn away from the
truth and perish, and his sin will be on the neck of his guardian. Allah
has said, ‘O ye who believe, guard yourselves and your family from the
fire; and even as the father would guard his son from the fire of this
world, by how much the more should he guard him from the fire of the
world to come? He will guard him from it by chastising him and educating
him and teaching him the best virtues. To this end he will only give his
boy to be nursed by a good, pious woman who eats the proper food, for the
milk from forbidden food has no blessing in it.’”

He then goes on to show that the education of a child consists in
teaching him table manners, the avoidance of unclean food, gluttony and
impoliteness. He advises parents to dress their children simply and not
in costly clothing. To quote once more:

“After teaching him these things it is wise to send him to school where
he shall learn the Koran and the pious traditions, and the tales of
the righteous and their lives, in order that a love of the pious may
be imprinted in his heart; and he should be kept from reading erotic
poetry and prevented from mixing with those people of education who think
that this sort of reading is profitable and elevating, because, on the
contrary, it produces in the hearts of children the seeds of corruption.
Whenever the boy shows a good character or an act which is praiseworthy,
he must be honoured for it and rewarded, so that he will be happy; and
this should especially be done in the presence of others. If, on the
contrary, he should act otherwise once and again, it is necessary to take
no notice of it, nor to lay bare his fault, as though you imagine no one
would dare to do such a thing, especially if the boy himself conceals
it, and has determined to hide it; for exposing would only make him more
bold in the future. If he should repeat the fault, he can be punished in
secret.”

Such is the strange ethical teaching—a mingling of good and bad advice—on
the part of one who has always been considered as the pillar of
orthodoxy and one of the great authorities on Moslem morals.

The ethics of marriage holds a large place in Moslem literature, and
also in the works of Al-Ghazali. Marriage is enjoined upon every Moslem,
and celibacy is discouraged. “Marriage,” said Mohammed the Prophet, “is
my custom, and he who dislikes it does not belong to my people.” And in
another tradition: “Marriage is one-half of true religion.” Even the
members of the ascetic orders in Islam are generally married. The vow of
celibacy was therefore not known among the mystics. Marriage is defined
by Moslem jurists as “a contract by which the husband obtains possession
of the wife and is allowed to enjoy her, if there be no legal impediment
preventing the same.” “Marriage,” says Al-Ghazali himself, “is a kind of
slavery, for the wife becomes the slave of her husband and it is her duty
to obey him absolutely in everything he requires of her, except in what
is contrary to the laws of Islam.”

In the selection of a wife, Al-Ghazali advises his disciples to look
for the following qualifications: (1) piety, (2) good character, (3)
beauty, (4) a moderate dowry, (5) ability to bear children, (6) that she
be a virgin, (7) of a good family, (8) that she be not of near relation.
The duties of the husband to the wife and the duties of the wife to her
husband are given in detail by Al-Ghazali in his _Ihya_ and in some
of his other works. The husband, according to this teaching, ought to
maintain _a golden mean_ in dealing with his wife in twelve points,
that is, he means that there should be no excess of kindness or excess
of harshness in any of these particulars: (1) the marriage feast; (2)
behaviour; (3) playfulness or caressing; (4) maintaining his dignity; (5)
jealousy; (6) pecuniary allowance; (7) teaching; (8) granting every wife
her rights (in the Moslem sense); (9) chastisement; (10) the rules of
cohabitation; (11) childbirth; (12) divorce. In one place he says if the
wife be disobedient and obstinate, the husband has the right to punish
her and force her to obey him, but he must proceed gradually, exhort,
admonish, threaten, abstain from intercourse with her for three days,
beat her so as to let her feel the pain, but be careful not to wound her
in the face, make her blood flow abundantly or break a bone! The teaching
of Al-Ghazali on divorce and slavery is so thoroughly Moslem that much
of it is untranslatable. Suffice it to say that he agrees with other
doctors of Moslem law in excusing onanism and other sins under certain
circumstances, and even indicates that it may become a duty if practiced
in order to escape from greater sins.[68]

In spite of his Islamic conception of the sexual relation, Al-Ghazali
certainly inspires our respect by what he says on the kindly treatment of
the wife and the evil of divorce. Only one would like to know whether he
himself had more than one wife and whether she was a worthy helpmeet to
her husband and he to her. His biographers are silent.

“A man should remain on good terms with his wife. This does not mean that
he should never cause her pain, but that he should bear any annoyance she
causes him, whether by her unreasonableness or ingratitude, patiently.
Woman is created weak, and requiring concealment; she should therefore
be borne with patiently, and kept secluded. The Prophet said, ‘He who
bears the ill-humour of his wife patiently will earn as much merit as Job
did by the patient endurance of his trials.’ On his deathbed also he was
heard to say, ‘Continue in prayer and treat your wives well, for they are
your prisoners.’

“Wise men have said, ‘Consult women, and act the contrary to what they
advise.’ In truth there is something perverse in women, and if they are
allowed even a little license, they get out of control altogether, and
it is difficult to reduce them to order again. In dealing with them one
should endeavour to use a mixture of severity and tenderness, with a
greater proportion of the latter. The Prophet said, ‘Woman was formed of
a crooked rib; if you try to bend her, you will break her; if you leave
her alone, she will grow more and more crooked; therefore treat her
tenderly.’[69]

“The greatest care should be taken to avoid divorce, for, though divorce
is permitted, yet God disapproves of it, because the very utterance of
the word ‘divorce’ causes a woman pain, and how can it be right to pain
any one? When divorce is absolutely necessary, the formula for it should
not be repeated thrice all at once, but on three different occasions.
A woman should be divorced kindly, not through anger and contempt, and
not without a reason. After divorce a man should give his former wife a
present, and not tell others that she has been divorced for such and such
a fault. Of a certain man who was instituting divorce proceedings against
his wife it is related that people asked him, ‘Why are you divorcing
her?’ He answered, ‘I do not reveal my wife’s secrets.’ When he had
actually divorced her, he was asked again, and said, ‘She is a stranger
to me now; I have nothing to do with her private affairs.’”

All the relations of life, its pleasures and duties pass under review in
books on _ʾAdab_. Every detail of outward conduct is regulated by what is
said to have been the practice of the Prophet. How to eat a pomegranate
correctly, how to take a bath, how to use the _Miswak_, or tooth-brush,
how to behave towards Jews and Christians, and what ornaments are
allowed—all this comes under the head of Moslem Ethics. We give the
reader one striking example.

In his work, “The Alchemy of Happiness,” there is a chapter concerning
“Music and Dancing as Aids to the Religious Life.” The question of
musical instruments was discussed as earnestly in the days of Al-Ghazali
as it has been more recently among Christians who dread the desecration
of God’s house by the “cist of whistles.” There was much dispute among
theologians as to the lawfulness of music and dancing as religious
exercises. The Sufis had already introduced the practice. The following
paragraphs show Al-Ghazali’s common sense, keen humour, and at the same
time his rather doubtful conclusion; for he even justifies erotic poetry
if sung for the glory of God:

“The heart of man has been so constituted by the Almighty that, like a
flint, it contains a hidden fire which is evoked by music and harmony,
and renders man beside himself with ecstasy. These harmonies are echoes
of that higher world of beauty which we call the world of spirits; they
remind man of his relationship to that world, and produce in him an
emotion so deep and strange that he himself is powerless to explain it.
The effect of music and dancing is deeper in proportion as the nature on
which they act are simple and prone to emotion; they fan into a flame
whatever love is already dormant in the heart, whether it be earthly and
sensual, or divine and spiritual....

“Passing over the cases where music and dancing rouse into a flame evil
desires already dormant in the heart, we come to those cases where they
are quite lawful. Such are those of the pilgrims who celebrate the
glories of the House of God at Mecca in song, and thus incite others to
go on pilgrimage, and of minstrels whose music and songs stir up martial
ardour in the breasts of their auditors and incite them to fight against
the infidels. Similarly, mournful music which excites sorrow for sin and
failure in the religious life is lawful; of this nature was the music of
David. But dirges which increase sorrow for the dead are not lawful, for
it is written in the Koran, ‘Despair not over what you have lost.’ On the
other hand, joyful music at weddings and feasts and on such occasions as
a circumcision or the return from a journey is lawful....

“The states of ecstasy into which the Sufis fall vary according to the
emotions which predominate in them—love, fear, desire, repentance, etc.
These states, as we have mentioned above, are often the result not only
of hearing verses of the Koran, but erotic poetry. Some have objected to
the reciting of poetry, as well as of the Koran, on these occasions; but
it should be remembered that all the verses of the Koran are not adapted
to stir the emotions—such, for instance, as that which commands that a
man should leave his mother the sixth part of his property and his sister
the half, or that which orders that a widow must wait four months after
the death of her husband before becoming espoused to another man. The
natures which can be thrown into religious ecstasy by the recital of such
verses are peculiarly sensitive and very rare.” They certainly are!

The inconsistencies and contradictions in Al-Ghazali’s theory of conduct
surprise us when we peruse his works. Sometimes he leads us to high
mountain ranges whose summits are gilded with the light of heaven, the
great truths of Theism, the ideals of eternity; and again he plunges us
into the sloughs of sensuous and worldly discussion—themes unworthy of
his pen.

Let us get back to the mountain tops where the air is healthier.
Al-Ghazali, whatever may have been his failure in other respects, had
high ideals for the attainment of morals from the Moslem standpoint.
In his “The Alchemy of Happiness” he says, “When in the crucible of
abstinence the soul is purged from carnal passions it attains to the
highest, and in place of being a slave to lust and anger becomes endued
with angelic qualities. Attaining that state, man finds his heaven in
the contemplation of Eternal Beauty, and no longer in fleshly delights.
The spiritual alchemy which operates this change in him, like that which
transmutes base metals into gold, is not easily discovered, nor to be
found in the house of every old woman.”

And in the attainment of this ideal he is sure that there must be a fight
for character. The goal is not to be reached by easy stages. The warfare
against passion is real and costs sacrifice. He gives us a picture of
this Holy War almost in the language of John Bunyan. “For the carrying
on of this spiritual warfare by which the knowledge of oneself and of
God is to be obtained, the body may be figured as a kingdom, the soul
as its king and the different senses and faculties as constituting an
army. Reason may be called the vizier, or prime minister, passion the
revenue-collector, and anger the police-officer. Under the guise of
collecting revenue, passion is continually prone to plunder on its own
account, while resentment is always inclined to harshness and extreme
severity. Both of these, the revenue-collector and the police-officer,
have to be kept in due subordination to the king, but not killed or
expelled, as they have their own proper functions to fulfil. But if
passion and resentment master reason, the ruin of the soul infallibly
ensues. A soul which allows its lower faculties to dominate the higher is
as one who should hand over an angel to the power of a dog or a Mussalman
to the tyranny of an unbeliever.”

The struggle is, therefore, between the flesh and the spirit. Like St.
Paul, Al-Ghazali must have experienced that which he describes: “The good
that I would I do not, and the evil that I would not, that I do.” He is
conscious of the inner struggle between the higher and the lower natures
in man. Again and again he contrasts the body and the soul as to their
eternal value in their struggle for supremacy. Both are of God, His gift
to us; both show His wisdom and His power; but there is no comparison
when we try to estimate their real values.

“The body, so to speak, is simply the riding animal of the soul, and
perishes while the soul endures. The soul should take care of the body,
just as a pilgrim on his way to Mecca takes care of his camel; but if
the pilgrim spends his whole time in feeding and adorning his camel, the
caravan will leave him behind, and he will perish in the desert.”[70]

The four leading virtues—the mothers of all other good
qualities—Al-Ghazali says are “Wisdom, temperance, bravery, and
moderation (or the golden mean of conduct).”[71] This classification he
has borrowed from Plato with so much else on the theory of conduct. He
explains all these virtues in terms of the Koran and illustrates them
from the lives of Mohammed and the early saints of Islam as well as the
later mystics.

He is at his best when he speaks of vices and their opposite virtues. No
one can read his chapter against pride and boasting without seeing that
he gives us again a page from his own experience. He begins by quoting
the saying of the Prophet, “No one shall enter paradise in whose heart
there is the weight of a grain of mustard seed of pride.” And another
saying, “Said God Most High, ‘Pride is my mantle and majesty is my cloak,
and whosoever takes away one of them from me I will cast him into hell,
and I care not.’” Another saying attributed to Mohammed is evidently
taken from the Gospel, “Whoso humbleth himself before God, God will exalt
him, and whosoever is proud God will bring him low.” His definition of
humility is beautiful: “True humility is to be subject to the truth and
to be corrected by it even though thou shouldst hear it from a mere boy
on the street.” In this connection he quotes also a saying of Jesus:
“Said the Messiah (upon Him be peace), ‘Blessed is he to whom God has
taught His book. He shall never die in his pride.’”

Pride is shown in different ways. Al-Ghazali enumerates pride of
knowledge, of worship, of race and blood, of beauty and dress, of wealth,
of bodily strength, of leadership. He quotes Mohammed as an example of
humility, and also Abi Saeed el Khudri, who said, “Oh, my son, eat unto
God and drink unto God and dress unto God. But whatsoever thou doest
of all of these and there enters into them pride or hypocrisy it is
disobedience. Whatever you do in your house do it yourself as did the
Apostle of God, for he used to milk the goats and patch his sandals and
sew his cloak and eat with the servants and buy in the bazaar, nor did
his pride forbid him carrying his own packages home; and he was friendly
to the rich and to the poor and he gave greetings himself first to every
one whom he met, etc.”

It is noteworthy that when he rises to the highest ethical teaching he
bases his remarks on the sayings (mostly apocryphal) of Christ, which we
collate in our final chapter. Al-Ghazali tried hard but failed to find in
Mohammed the ideals of his own heart. This is the tragedy of Islam.




VIII

Al-Ghazali as a Mystic

    “Mysticism is religion, and supplies a refuge for men of
    religious minds who find it no longer possible for them to
    rest on ‘external authority’—as George Tyrrell both expounded
    and illustrated for us. Once turn away from revelation and
    little choice remains to you but the choice between Mysticism
    and Rationalism. There is not so much choice between these
    things, it is true, as enthusiasts on either side are apt to
    imagine. The difference between them is very much a matter of
    temperament, or perhaps we may even say of temperature. The
    Mystic blows hot, the Rationalist cold. Warm up a Rationalist
    and you inevitably get a Mystic; chill down a Mystic and you
    find yourself with a Rationalist on your hands. The history
    of thought illustrates repeatedly the easy passage from one
    to the other. Each centers himself in himself, and the human
    self is not so big that it makes any large difference where
    within yourself you take your center. Nevertheless just because
    Mysticism blows hot, its ‘eccentricity’ is the more attractive
    to men of lively religious feeling.”

                                     —_Benjamin B. Warfield, in the
                                      “Princeton Theological Review.”_


VIII

AL-GHAZALI AS A MYSTIC

One of the earliest mystics in Islam was Rabiaʾ, who was buried in
Jerusalem. She was a native of Busrah and died at Jerusalem as early as
the second century of Islam. Her tomb, according to Ibn Khallikan, was
an object of pilgrimage in the Middle Ages, and was probably visited by
Al-Ghazali. The following verses are quoted from her in the _Ihya_ (vol.
iv. p. 298):

    “Two ways I love Thee: selfishly,
    And next, as worthy is of Thee.
    ’Tis selfish love that I do naught
    Save think on Thee with every thought:
    ’Tis purest love when Thou dost raise
    The veil to my adoring gaze.
    Not mine the praise in that or this,
    Thine is the praise in both, I wis.”

The Moslem mystics, or _Sufis_, however, received their name through Abu
Khair, who lived at the end of the second century of the Hegira. His
disciples wore a woolen garment, and from the word _suf_, which means
wool, they obtained their name. In the next century, al-Junaid (A. H.
297), one of Al-Ghazali’s favourite authorities, was the great leader
of the movement, which spread throughout Islam. It was a reaction from
the barren monotheism and the rigid ritualism of Islam. This kind of
orthodoxy did not meet the needs of the more imaginative mind of the
Eastern races who accepted Islam. The preachers of the new doctrine
travelled everywhere and mixed with men of all conditions. In this way
they adopted ideas from many sources, although always professing to base
their teaching on the Koran and Tradition.

According to Nicholson, the Mystics of Islam borrowed not only from
Christianity and Neoplatonism, but from Gnosticism and Buddhism. Many
Gospel texts and sayings of Jesus, most of them apocryphal, are cited
in the oldest Sufi writings. From Christianity they took the use of the
woollen dress, the vows of silence, the litanies (_Zikr_), and other
ascetic practices. Their teaching also has many interesting parallels
which Nicholson summarizes as follows: “The same expressions are applied
to the founder of Islam which are used by St. John, St. Paul, and later
mystical theologians concerning Christ. Thus, Mohammed is called the
Light of God, he is said to have existed before the creation of the
world, he is adored as the source of all life, actual and possible, he is
the Perfect Man in whom all the divine attributes are manifested, and
a Sufi tradition ascribes to him the saying, ‘He that hath seen me hath
seen Allah.’ In the Moslem scheme, however, the Logos doctrine occupies
a subordinate place, as it obviously must when the whole duty of man is
believed to consist in realizing the unity of God.”[72]

Neoplatonism gave them the doctrine of emanation and ecstasy. The
following version of the doctrine of the seventy thousand veils, as
expounded to Canon Gairdner by a modern dervish, shows clear traces of
Gnosticism. “Seventy Thousand Veils separate Allah, the One reality,
from the world of matter and of sense. And every soul passes before his
birth through these seventy thousand. The inner half of these are veils
of light: the outer half, veils of darkness. For every one of the veils
of light passed through, in this journey towards birth, the soul puts
off a divine quality; and for every one of the dark veils, it puts on
an earthly quality. Thus the child is born weeping, for the soul knows
its separation from Allah, the one Reality. And when the child cries
in its sleep, it is because the soul remembers something of what it
has lost. Otherwise, the passage through the veils has brought with it
forgetfulness (_nisyan_): and for this reason man is called _insan_.
He is now, as it were, in prison in his body, separated by these thick
curtains from Allah. But the whole purpose of Sufism, the Way of the
dervish, is to give him an escape from this prison, an apocalypse of the
Seventy Thousand Veils, a recovery of the original unity with The One,
while still in this body.”[73]

In regard to Buddhist influence, Professor Goldziher has called attention
to the fact that in the eleventh century the teaching of Buddha exerted
considerable influence in eastern Persia, especially at Balkh, a city
famous for the number of Sufis who dwelt in it. From the Buddhists came
the use of the rosary (afterwards adopted by Christians in Europe), and
perhaps also the doctrine of _fana_ or absorption into God.

“While _fana_,” says Nicholson, “in its pantheistic form is radically
different from Nirvana, the terms coincide so closely in other ways
that we cannot regard them as being altogether unconnected. _Fana_
has an ethical aspect: it involves the extinction of all passions and
desires. The passing away of evil qualities and of the evil actions
which they produce is said to be brought about by the continuance of
the corresponding good qualities and actions.”[74] The cultivation
of character by the contemplation of God in a mystical sense was the
real goal. To know God was to be like Him and to be like Him ended in
absorption or ecstasy.[75] One of their favourite sayings was that
attributed to God by the Prophet, “I was a hidden treasure and I desired
to be known, so I created the creation in order that I might be known.”
Just as the universe is the mirror of God’s being, so the heart of man is
to the Sufi the mirror of the universe. If he would know God or Truth he
must look into his own heart.

To quote Al-Ghazali himself: “The aim which the Sufis set before them is
as follows: To free the soul from the tyrannical yoke of the passions, to
deliver it from its wrong inclinations and evil instincts, in order that
in the purified heart there should only remain room for God and for the
invocation of His holy name.

“As it was more easy to learn their doctrine than to practise it,
I studied first of all those of their books which contain it: _The
Nourishment of Hearts_, by Abu Talib of Mecca, the works of Hareth el
Muhasibi, and the fragments which still remain, of Junaid, Shibli, Abu
Yezid, Bustami and other leaders (whose souls may God sanctify). I
acquired a thorough knowledge of their researches, and I learned all
that was possible to learn of their methods by study and oral teaching.
It became clear that the last stage could not be reached by mere
instruction, but only by transport, ecstasy, and the transformation of
the moral being” (p. 41, “Confessions”).

“Among the teachings of the Sufis was that of the preëxistence of
Mohammed the Prophet in the Essence of Light. According to the
Traditions, ‘I was a prophet while Adam was yet between earth and
clay,’ and ‘There is no prophet after me,’ Sufis hold that Mohammed
was a prophet even before the creation and that he still holds office.
This identification of Mohammed with the Primal Element explains
the names sometimes given him, such as Universal Reason, the Great
Spirit, the Truth of Humanity, the Possessor of the Ray of Light—the
Nur-i-Muhammadi—from God’s own splendour.”[76]

Absorption in God, therefore, or union with Him is the goal of all the
Sufi teachings and practices. The entire negation of self clears the
way for the apprehension of the Truth. This journey towards God has its
stages which are generally given as eight in number: service, love,
abstraction, knowledge, ecstasy, truth, union, extinction. Some of the
Sufis went so far as to set aside external religion, and showed an utter
indifference to the ritual as well as to the moral law. Al-Ghazali was
not of their number. He teaches, however, that the ordinary theologian
cannot enter on the mystic path, for he is still in bondage to dogma and
wanders about in darkness. Prayer, fasting, pilgrimage in all their
requirements and the details of their observations have, therefore, a
twofold significance; the outward and formal one which is understood by
the common people, and the spiritual, real, esoteric significance which
is only grasped by those who give themselves entirely to God.

Al-Ghazali was thoroughly aware of the dangers of Sufism both in its
creed by way of becoming pantheistic, and in its antinomian practices. He
saw that divorce between religion and morals would be disastrous and must
therefore have been shocked by such verses as those of Omar Khayyam:

    “Khayyam! why weep you that your life is bad;
    What boots it thus to mourn? Rather be glad.
    He that sins not can make no claim to mercy;
    Mercy was made for sinners—be not sad.”

His teaching regarding sin and repentance was, as we shall see later,
altogether more fundamental.

From the earliest times pantheistic Sufism found a home in Khorasan
among the Moslems. The old idea of incarnation emerged when the Shiah
sect separated itself and paid such high veneration to Ali. The sect of
the Khattahiyah worshipped the Imam Jafar Sadik as God. Others believed
that the divine spirit had descended upon Abdallah Ibn Amr. In Khorasan
the opinion was widely spread that Abu Muslim, the great general who
overturned the dynasty of the Ommeyads and set up that of the Abbassides,
was an incarnation of the spirit of God. In the same province under Al
Mansur, the second Abbasside Caliph, a religious leader named Ostasys
professed to be an emanation of the Godhead. He collected thousands of
followers, and the movement was not suppressed without much fighting.
Under the Caliph Mahdi a self-styled Avatar named Ata arose, who on
account of a golden mask which he continually wore was called Mokanna,
or “the veiled prophet.” He also had a numerous following, and held the
Caliph’s armies in check for several years, till in A. D. 779, being
closely invested in his castle, he, with his whole harem and servants,
put an end to themselves.

What Al-Ghazali himself thought of these speculations of the Sufis
and the danger of this kind of mysticism we learn from his book: “The
speculations of the Sufis may be divided into two classes: to the first
category belong all the phases about love to God and union with Him,
which according to them compensate for all outward works. Many of them
allege that they have attained to complete oneness with God; that for
them the veil has been lifted; that they have not only seen the Most High
with their eyes, but have spoken with Him, and so far as to say ‘The Most
High spoke thus and thus.’ They wish to imitate Hallaj, who was crucified
for using such expressions, and justify themselves by quoting his saying,
‘I am the Truth.’ They also refer to Abu Yazid Bistami, who is reported
to have exclaimed, ‘Praise be to me!’ instead of ‘Praise be to God!’
This kind of speculation is extremely dangerous for the common people,
and it is notorious that a number of craftsmen have left their occupation
to make similar assertions. Such speeches are highly popular, as they
hold out to men the prospect of laying aside active work with the idea of
purging the soul through mystical ecstasies and transports. The common
people are not slow to claim similar rights for themselves and to catch
up wild and whirling expressions. As regards the second class of Sufi
speculation, it consists in the use of unintelligible phrases which by
their outward apparent meaning and boldness attract attention, but which
on closer inspection prove to be devoid of any real sense.”

Not only did Al-Ghazali realize the danger on the side of pantheism,
but he was aware that such religious enthusiasm often led to gross
hypocrisy. In his _Ihya_ he mentions “that the prophet commanded that
whoever did not feel moved to tears at the recitation of the Koran should
pretend to weep and to be deeply moved”; for, adds Al-Ghazali sagely,
“in these matters one begins by forcing oneself to do what afterwards
comes spontaneously.” Moreover, the fact that religious excitement was
looked upon as the mark of a fervent mind and devout intensity, vastly
increased the number of those who claimed mystic illumination. He divides
the ecstatic conditions which the hearing of poetical recitations
produces into four classes. The first, which is the lowest, is that
of the simple sensuous delight in melody. The second class is that of
pleasure in the melody and of understanding the words in their apparent
sense. The third class consists of those who apply the meaning of the
words to the relations between man and God. To this class belongs the
would-be initiate into Sufism. He goes on to say, “He has necessarily
a goal marked out for him to aim at, and this goal is the knowledge of
God, meeting Him and union with Him by the way of secret contemplation,
and the removal of the veil which conceals Him. In order to compass
this aim the Sufi has a special path to follow; he must perform various
ascetic practices and overcome certain spiritual obstacles in doing so.
Now when, during the recitation of poetry, the Sufi hears mention made of
blame or praise, of acceptance or refusal, of union with the Beloved or
separation from Him, of lament over a departed joy or longing for a look,
as often occurs in Arabic poetry, one or the other of these accords with
his spiritual state and acts upon him like a spark on tinder, to set his
heart aflame. Longing and love overpower him and unfold to him manifold
vistas of spiritual experience.

“The fourth and highest class is that of the fully initiated who have
passed through the stages above mentioned, and whose minds are closed to
everything except God. Such an one is wholly denuded of self, so that he
no longer knows his own experiences and practices, and, as though with
senses sealed, sinks into the ocean of the contemplation of God. This
condition the Sufis characterize as self-annihilation (_Fana_).” (“The
Confessions.”)

Elsewhere he compares this highest condition of ecstasy of the human soul
to a clear mirror—of course he means the mirror of the ancients made of
polished brass or bronze—which reflects the colours of anything towards
which it is directed. Again and again he comes back to this metaphor in
his books. Sin is like rust on the mirror of the soul. Light is reflected
in it, but the rays are no longer clear, until by repentance the rust of
guilt and passion are removed.

Al-Ghazali’s mysticism was always accompanied by orthodox insistence on
the six articles of faith and the five pillars of practice, through which
alone the soul can receive its fundamental impulse towards God.

Yet Al-Ghazali’s mysticism leads him to emphasize always the spiritual
side of worship. The mere form is nothing in itself. The author of the
Masnavi had mastered Al-Ghazali and absorbed his spirit when he wrote:

    “Fools laud and magnify the mosque,
    While they strive to oppress holy men of heart.
    But the former is mere form, the latter spirit and truth.
    The only true mosque is that in the hearts of saints.
    The mosque that is built in the heart of the saints
    Is the place of worship of all, for God dwells there.”

What he says on the imitation of God is based almost literally on
Al-Ghazali’s book describing God’s attributes.

    “God calls Himself ‘Seeing,’ to the end that
    His eye may every moment scare you from sinning.
    God calls Himself ‘Hearing,’ to the end that
    You may close your lips against foul discourse.
    God calls Himself ‘Knowing,’ to the end that
    You may be afraid to plot evil.
    These names are not mere accidental names of God,
    As a negro may be called _Kafur_ (white);
    They are names derived from God’s essential attributes,
    Not mere vain titles of the First Cause.”

Abu Saʾid bin Abu ’l-Khair, also of Khorasan (A. H. 396-440), was one of
Al-Ghazali’s teachers in the school of mysticism. When he was asked what
a Sufi was he said: “Whatever is in thy head, forget it; whatever is in
thy hand, give it away; and whatever happens to thee, disregard it.”

In regard to the rise of Sufic teaching, its origin and character, Dr.
C. Snouck Hurgronje remarks: “The lamp which Allah had caused Mohammed
to hold up to guide mankind with its light, was raised higher and higher
after the Prophet’s death, in order to shed its light over an ever
increasing part of humanity. This was not possible, however, without its
reservoir being replenished with all the different kinds of oil that had
from time immemorial given light to those different nations. The oil of
mysticism came from Christian circles, and its Neoplatonic origin was
quite unmistakable; Persia and India also contributed to it. There were
those who, by asceticism, by different methods of mortifying the flesh,
liberated the spirit that it might rise and become united with the origin
of all being; to such an extent that with some the profession of faith
was reduced to the blasphemous exclamation: ‘I am Allah.’”

[Illustration: Facsimile title page of the last book Ghazali wrote,
entitled “Minhaj Al-ʾAbidin.” On the margin this Cairo edition gives
another of his celebrated works, “Badayat-al-Hadaya.”]

But he goes on to say that although many went to such extremes and in
their pantheistic ideas lost sight of the moral law and the restriction
of conduct it was Al-Ghazali who rescued Islam to a large degree from
this danger. He recommended moral perfection of the soul by asceticism
as the only way through which men could approach nearer to God. “His
mysticism wished to avoid the danger of pantheism, to which so many
others were led by their contemplations, and which so often engendered
disregard of the revealed law, or even of morality.”

It is therefore from the days of Al-Ghazali that ethical mysticism
obtained its birthright in the world of Islam together with law and
dogma. These now form the sacred trio of religious sciences, and are
taught in every great centre of Moslem learning. For dogma other writers
are more authoritative. For Moslem law there is the study of the great
writers of the four Schools, but in matters of ethics Al-Ghazali still
holds his own.

To quote once more from Hurgronje: “The ethical mysticism of Al-Ghazali
is generally recognized as orthodox; and the possibility of attaining
to a higher spiritual sphere by means of methodic asceticism and
contemplation is doubted by few. The following opinion has come to
prevail in wide circles: the Law offers the bread of life to all the
faithful, the dogmatics are the arsenal from which the weapons must be
taken to defend the treasures of religion against unbelief and heresy,
but mysticism shows the earthly pilgrim the way to Heaven.”[77]

In one particular, however, this ethical teaching is utterly
disappointing. Al-Ghazali’s mysticism is not for the multitude. It is
esoteric, for a particular class who are filled with religious pride that
they, in this respect, are not as other men. Even the noblest minds in
Islam restrict true religious life to an aristocratic minority, and, like
the Pharisees of old, consider the ignorance of the multitude an evil
that cannot be remedied. The teaching of Al-Ghazali was intended not for
the masses but for the initiates.

It is remarkable that while he founded a cloister for Sufis at Tus and
taught and governed there himself during the closing years of his life,
he left no established order behind him. Professor Macdonald thinks that
in his time the movement towards continuous corporations and brotherhoods
had not yet begun. But this is a mistake, for in the _Kashf-al-Mahjub_
(A. H. 456) we already find a list of the various schools of Dervishes
and their peculiar methods of devotion. Al-Ghazali’s _teaching_, however,
is popular among all the Dervish orders of to-day.

A special study has been made of one of Al-Ghazali’s esoteric works on
mysticism entitled _Mishkat al-Anwar_, by Canon W. H. T. Gairdner, in
which he answers the critics of this work, and shows conclusively that
whatever may have been Al-Ghazali’s method he was sincere. We borrow from
this interesting and scholarly paper two paragraphs to illustrate the
method of Al-Ghazali:

“In expounding the tradition of the Seventy Thousand Veils with
which Allah had veiled Himself from the vision of man, Ghazali finds
opportunity to graduate various religions and sects according as they
are more, or less, thickly veiled from the light; _i. e._, according
as they more or less nearly approximate to Absolute Truth (al-Haqq—the
Real—Allah). The veils which veil the various religions and sects from
the Divine Light are conceived of as twofold in character, light
veils and dark veils, and the principle of graduation is according as
the followers of these religions and sects are veiled (_a_) by dark
veils, (_b_) by dark and light mixed, or (_c_) by light veils only. The
recital closes with a short passage which tells us that the Attainers
(_al-wasilun_) have had the Sufi doctrine of _kashf_ in its most explicit
and striking form.

“(_a_) Those veiled by pure darkness, called here the _mulhida_, are
those who deny the existence of Allah and of a Last Day. They have two
main divisions, those who have inquired for a cause to account for the
world and have made Nature that cause; and those who have made no such
inquiry. The former are clearly the Naturists or _dahriya_ who were the
very abomination of desolation to Ghazali. It is curious that nothing
further is said of their evil conduct, and it is entirely characteristic
of mediæval thought that the deepest damnation is thus reserved for false
opinion, rather than for evil life. Evil doers form the second division
(which, however, is not definitely said to be higher than the first),
composed of those who are too greedy and selfish so much as to look for
a cause, or in fact to think of anything except their vile selves. These
we might style the Egotists; they are ranged in ascending order into (1)
seekers of sensual pleasure, (2) seekers of dominion, (3) money-grubbers,
(4) lovers of vain-glory. In the first he has the ordinary sensual herd
in view, as well as the philosophers of sensualism; their veils are
the veils of the bestial attributes, while those of the second are the
ferocious ones (sabaʾiya). The denotation of the latter class is quaintly
given as Arabs, some Kurds and very numerous Fools. The third and fourth
subdivisions do not call for comment.

“Mounting from these regions of unmitigated darkness we come to (_b_),
those veiled by light and darkness mixed. Ghazali’s idea of the dark
veils in general may be gathered from a comparison of this and the
previous section. In this section the dark veils are shown to be the
false conceptions of deity, which the human mind is deluded into making
by the gross and limited elements in its own constitution, namely (in
ascending order) by the Senses, the Phantasy or Imagination and the
Discursive Reason. The dark veils of the previous section were the
unmitigated egotism and materialism which employed these faculties for
self and the world alone, without a thought of deity. The light veils,
accordingly, are the true but partial intuitions whereby man rises to
the idea of deity, or to a something at least higher than himself.
These intuitions are no more than partial, because they fix upon some
one aspect or attribute of deity,—majesty, beauty, and so forth,—and
believing it to be all in all proceed to deify all majestic, beautiful,
etc., things. Thus they half reveal, half conceal, Allah, and so are
literally veils of light.”[78]

Does not this remind us of St. Paul’s words: “Now we see through (in) a
glass darkly but then face to face, etc.”? Did Al-Ghazali borrow from the
Gospel here also?

It has been pointed out by Margoliouth and others that Mohammedan Sufism
is largely based on Christian teaching. This is especially true in
the case of Abu Talib, Al-Ghazali’s favourite writer on this subject.
“Sometimes the matter is taken over bodily; thus the Parable of the Sower
is told by the earliest Sufi writer. Abu Talib takes over the dialogue
in the Gospel eschatology between the Saviour and those who are taunted
with having seen Him hungry and refused Him food; only for the questioner
he substitutes Allah, and for ‘the least of these’ his Moslem brother.
Not a few of the Beatitudes are taken over sometimes with the name of
their author. Commonplaces which are found in Christian homiletic works
reappear with little or no alteration in the Sufi sermons. In the Acts of
Thomas, the Apostle, when employed by a king to build a palace, spends
the money in charity to the poor. Presently the king’s brother dies, and
finds that a wonderful palace has been built for the king in Paradise
with the Alms which Thomas bestowed in his name. This story reappears
in the doctrine of Abu Talib that when a poor man takes charity from the
wealthy, he is thereby building him a house in Paradise.”[79]

Not only in Qut-ul-Qulub, the famous book of Abu Talib, but in all
Al-Ghazali’s works we have numerous quotations and references to the
Gospels apocryphal or genuine, as we shall see later.

Al-Ghazali prescribed forms for morning and evening prayer which do
not differ greatly from the prayers recommended in Christian manuals
of devotion. His teaching on prayer is an effort to spiritualize the
ceremony, and in this he follows the teaching of the older Sufis.
Absorption in God during prayer was their ideal. To avoid distraction
men were advised to pray towards a blank wall, lest any architectural
ornament might distract their attention. Others boasted that they could
attain to absorption under any circumstances. “There were saints who when
they started their _salat_ told their women-folk that they might chatter
as much as they liked and even beat drums; they were too much absorbed
in prayer to hear, however loud the noise. When one of them was saying
his _salat_ in the Mosque of Basrah a column fell, bringing down with it
an erection of four storeys; he continued praying, and when after he had
finished the people congratulated him on his escape, he asked, what from?
Great names were quoted for the practice of praying hastily, and so
shortening the time taken by the devotion as to give Satan no chance of
distracting the thoughts.”

Al-Ghazali, however, believed in reverence and emphasized outward and
inward preparation for this act of devotion. “Prayer,” says he, “is a
nearness to God and a gift which we present to the King of kings even
as one who comes from a distant village brings it before the ruler. And
your gift is accepted of God and will be returned to you on the great day
of judgment, so that you are responsible to present it as beautiful as
possible.” He quotes with approval a saying of Mohammed: “True prayer is
to make one’s self meek and humble,” and adds that the presence of the
heart is the soul of true prayer and that absent-mindedness destroys all
its value.

“True prayer,” he continues, “consists of six things: the presence of the
heart, understanding, magnifying God, fear, hope, and a sense of shame.”
He then treats successively these elements of true prayer, showing in
what they consist, how they are occasioned and how they may be secured.
We secure the presence of our hearts by a deep sense of the eternal.
What he says in regard to God’s greatness may well be compared with such
passages as the eighth Psalm, “What is man that Thou art mindful of him?”
Our sense of shame is quickened, he says, by remembering our shortcomings
in worship. The only way we can secure the presence of the heart in
prayer is by drawing our thoughts away from outward diversions and from
those within. We should not pray in the public streets, for there our
mind is diverted. If we can pray towards a dead wall on which there is
nothing to see it will be helpful. But the inward withdrawal of the heart
is still more important.

What he says about the true _kibla_ is also worth quoting. “It is the
turning away of your outward gaze from everything save the direction of
the holy house of God. Do you not then think that the turning aside of
your heart from all other things to the consideration of God Most High
is required of you? It certainly is. Nothing else is required of you in
prayer than this, so that I would say the face of your heart must turn
with the face of your body; and even as no one is able to face the house
of God save by turning away from every other direction, so the heart does
not truly turn towards God save by being separated from everything else
than himself.”

“When you stand up to pray,” he says, “remember the day when you must
stand before God’s throne and be judged. Be clear of hypocrisy in prayer.
Do not follow those who profess to worship the face of God and at the
same time seek the praise of men.... Flee from the devil, for he is as
a devouring lion. How can any one who is pursued by a lion or an enemy
who would devour him or kill him say, ‘I take refuge with God from them
in this castle or in this fort,’ and still linger without entering the
fort? Surely this will not profit him. The only way to secure protection
is to change his place. In like manner whoever follows his lusts, which
are the lurking place of Satan and the abomination of the Merciful, the
mere saying, ‘I take refuge in God’ will not profit. Whosoever takes his
passions for a God he is under the reign of the devil and not in the safe
keeping of his Lord.”

He gives a long spiritual interpretation of the _fatihah_ which is
beautiful. “At the conclusion of your formal prayer,” he says, “offer
your humble petitions and thanksgivings and expect an answer and join
in your petition your parents and the rest of true believers. And when
you give the final _salaams_ remember the two angels who sit on your
shoulders.”

In the giving of alms he says seven things are required: promptness,
secrecy, example—(and in this connection he quotes a Tradition ascribed
_to the Prophet_ about the left hand not knowing what the right hand
doeth)—absence of boasting or pride, the gift must not be spoken of as
great, our best is demanded, for God is supremely good and He will only
take the best, and we must give our alms to the right persons. Of these
he mentions six classes: the pious, the learned, the righteous, the
deserving poor, those in need because of sickness or family distress,
_and relatives_. With him, charity _ends_ at home.

[Illustration: A Mihrab or prayer-niche made of cedar wood and dating
from the Eleventh Century. (Cairo Museum.)]

It is clear, however, from Al-Ghazali’s teaching that only Moslems are
intended in his classification of those who may receive the _Zakat_.
There is no universal brotherhood in Islam. Jews and Christians are
outside the pale, save as they have “the rights of neighbours.”

Christians might well regard Al-Ghazali’s mystical method of reading the
Koran in their perusal of the Scriptures. He tells us we must regard
eight things: the greatness of the revelation; the majesty of the
Speaker; the need of a prepared heart; meditation; understanding the
content of the passage, not twisting its meaning; we are to make the
application to ourselves; and finally we must read it so that its effect
may show in our lives. By the word Koran, he says, “we mean not the
reading but the following of the teaching, for the movement of the tongue
in pronouncing the words is of little value. The true reading is when the
tongue and the mind and the heart are associated. The part of the tongue
is to pronounce the words clearly in chanting. The part of the mind is
to interpret the meaning. The part of the heart is to translate it into
life. So that the tongue chants and the mind interprets and the heart is
a preacher and a warner.”

The greatest chapter of his _opus magnum_ is undoubtedly that on
Repentance. It may well be compared with the fifty-first Psalm or the
seventh chapter of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans. That Al-Ghazali
himself had a deep sense of sin, no one can doubt. He was not a Pharisee
but an earnest seeker after God. He teaches clearly that all the
prophets, including Mohammed, were sinners, although he nowhere mentions
any sinfulness in Jesus Christ.

One of the most important passages is that in which he speaks of the
benefit of asking pardon. It reads as follows: “Said Mohammed the Prophet
(upon him be peace): ‘Verily, I ask forgiveness of God and repent towards
Him every day seventy times.’” He said this, so says Al-Ghazali, although
God had already testified, “We have forgiven thee, thy former and thy
latter sins.” “Said the Prophet of God, ‘Truly a faintness comes over my
heart until I ask God forgiveness every day one hundred times.’ And said
the Prophet (on him be peace), ‘Whosoever says when he goes to sleep,
“I ask forgiveness of the Great God, than whom there is no other, the
living, and I repent of my sins three times,” God will forgive him his
sins even though they were as the foam of the seas or its sands piled up,
or as the numbers of the leaves on the trees or the days of the world.’
And said the Prophet of God (upon him be peace), ‘Whosoever says that
word I will forgive his sins though he deserts the army.’” Al-Ghazali
relates a story of one Hudhifa, who said, “I was accustomed to speak
sharply to my wife, and I said, ‘O, Apostle of God, I am afraid lest my
tongue should cause me to enter the fire,’ and then the Prophet of God
(upon whom be peace) said, ‘Where art thou in asking for forgiveness
compared with me, for I ask forgiveness of God every day one hundred
times.’ And ʾAyesha said (may God give her His favour), concerning the
Prophet, ‘He said to me, “If you have committed a sin ask forgiveness
of God and repent to Him, for true repentance for a sin is turning away
from it and asking forgiveness.”’ And the Apostle of God (upon whom be
peace) was accustomed to say when he asked for forgiveness: ‘O God,
forgive my sin and my ignorance and my excess in what I have done, and
what Thou knowest better than I do. O God, forgive me my trifling and
my earnestness, my mistakes and my wrong intentions and all that I have
done. O God, forgive me that which I have committed in the past and that
which I will commit in the future, and what I have hidden and what I have
revealed and what Thou knowest better than I do, Thou who art the first
and the last and Thou art the Almighty.’”[80] How different all this
is from the present day superficial teaching about the sinlessness of
Mohammed which is current in popular Islam.

Since Al-Ghazali tells this about Mohammed and _his_ need for
forgiveness, he naturally deals with repentance in no superficial fashion
but as one who has tasted the bitterness of remorse and has discovered
his own inability to meet the demands of the Moral Law. His book on
repentance has the following sections: (1) The reality of repentance.
(2) The necessity for repentance. (3) True repentance expected by God.
(4) Of what a man should repent, namely, the character of sin. (5) How
small sins become great. (6) Perfect repentance, its conditions and its
duration. (7) The degree of repentance. (8) How to become truly penitent.

One can only give a summary of his teaching. He rises far above the
Koran. In fact in some cases his proof texts, when we consider the
context, are a terrible indictment of the Prophet.[81]

He says the necessity of repentance always and for all men is evident
because no one of the human race is free from sin. “For even though in
some cases he is free from outward sin of his bodily members, he is not
free from sin of the heart; though free from passion he is not free from
the whisperings of Satan and forgetfulness of God, or of coming short of
the knowledge of God and His attributes and His works.” All this is a
failure of attainment and has its reasons; but if a man should forsake
the causes of this forgetfulness and employ himself with the opposite
virtues it would be a return to the right way; and the significance of
repentance is the return. You cannot imagine that any one of us is free
from this defect, for we only differ in degrees, but the root undoubtedly
exists in us. Of course he ignores original sin, being a Moslem, but
he makes a great deal of the effect that unrepented sin causes; but it
enters deeper and deeper into the heart until the image of God on the
mirror of the human soul is effaced.

Another illustration he uses is that of the heart as a goodly garment
which has been dragged through filth and needs to be washed again with
soap and water. “Using the heart in the exercise of our passions makes
it filthy. We must therefore wash it in the water of tears and by the
rubbing of repentance. It is for you to rub it clean and then God will
accept it.” How near and yet how far from the teaching of David and
Isaiah and St. Paul! Did Al-Ghazali ever hear some pious Jew quote
Isaiah’s statement that “all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags”?

True repentance has a twofold result according to this Moslem theologian.
Although he does not touch the deeper problem of how God can be just and
justify the sinner, he teaches that the result of the forgiveness of our
sins is that “we stand before God as though we had none,” and that “we
attain a higher degree of righteousness.” The cross of Christ is the
missing link in Al-Ghazali’s creed. He comes very close to Christianity
and yet always misses the heart of its teaching. He is groping towards
the light but does not grasp the hand of a friend or find a Redeemer. It
is all a righteousness by works and an attainment of the knowledge of God
by meditation without justification through an atonement.

Yet Al-Ghazali’s teaching on “the Practice of the Presence of God” is
very much like that of Brother Lawrence in his celebrated Essay. In his
“Beginner’s Guide to Religion and Morals” (Al Badayet) he writes: “Know,
therefore, that your companion who never deserts you at home or abroad,
when you are asleep or when you are awake, whether you are dead or alive,
is your Lord and Master, your Creator and Preserver, and whensoever you
remember Him He is sitting beside you. For God Himself hath said, ‘I am
the close companion of those who remember me.’ And whenever your heart
is contrite with sorrow because of your neglect of religion He is your
companion who keeps close to you, for God hath said, ‘I am with those who
are broken-hearted on my account.’ And if you only knew Him as you ought
to know Him you would take Him as a companion and forsake all men for
His sake. But as you are unable to do this at all times, I warn you that
you set aside a certain time by night and by day for communion with your
Creator that you may delight yourself in Him and that He may deliver you
from evil.”[82] At times, especially when he speaks of the _veils_ that
hide reality and God, we are reminded of the lines of Whitehead on “the
Second Day of Creation”:

    “I gaze aloof at the tissued roof
    Where time and space are the warp and woof,
      Which the King of Kings, like a curtain flings,
      O’er the dreadfulness of eternal things.
    But if I could see, as in truth they be,
    The glories that encircle me,
      I should lightly hold this tissued fold
      With its marvellous curtain of blue and gold;
    For soon the whole, like a parched scroll,
    Shall before my amazèd eyes unroll,
      And without a screen at one burst be seen
      The Presence in which I have always been.”

But Al-Ghazali did not know God’s nearness through the Incarnation of
Christ. The hoped-for Vision of God was always full of fear and dread of
judgment. The _fear_ of God was the beginning and end of wisdom. What he
understood by the fear of God is clear from the following passage taken
from the “Revival of Religious Sciences”: “By the fear of God I do not
mean a fear like that of women when their eyes swim and their hearts
beat at hearing some eloquent religious discourse, which they quickly
forget and turn again to frivolity. That is no real fear at all. He who
fears a thing flees from it, and he who hopes for a thing strives for
it, and the only fear that will save thee is that fear that forbids
sinning against God and instils obedience to Him. Beware of the shallow
fear of women and fools, who, when they hear of the terrors of the Lord,
say lightly, ‘We take refuge in God,’ and at the same time continue
in the very sins which will destroy them. Satan laughs at such pious
ejaculations. They are like a man who should meet a lion in a desert,
while there is a fortress at no great distance away, and when he sees the
ravenous beast, should stand exclaiming, ‘I take refuge in God.’ God will
not protect thee from the terrors of His judgment unless thou really take
refuge in Him.”

Included with his fear of God there was always a fear of death which
can best be described as mediæval or early Moslem. Towards the close of
his life he composed a short work on eschatology called “The Precious
Pearl.” It is no less lurid in its terrible pictures of death and the
judgment than some of his older works. In it he says: “When you watch a
dead man and see that the saliva has run from his mouth, that his lips
are contracted, his face black, the whites of his eyes showing, know that
he is damned, and that the fact of his damnation in the other world has
just been revealed to him. But if you see the dead with a smile on his
lips, a serene countenance, his eyes half-closed, know that he has just
received the good news of the happiness which awaits him in the other
world....

“On the day of Judgment, when all men are gathered before the throne
of God, their accounts are all cast up, and their good and evil deeds
weighed. During all this time each man believes he is the only one with
whom God is dealing. Though peradventure at the same moment God is taking
account of countless multitudes whose number is known to Him only. Men do
not see each other or hear each other speak.”

In summing up the character of the Mystic Claud Field says: “As St.
Augustine found deliverance from doubt and error in his inward experience
of God, and Descartes in self-consciousness, so Ghazali, unsatisfied with
speculation and troubled by scepticism, surrenders himself to the will of
God. Leaving others to demonstrate the existence of God from the external
world, he finds God revealed in the depths of his own consciousness and
the mystery of his own free will.... He is a unique and lonely figure
in Islam, and has to this day been only partially understood. In the
Middle Ages his fame was eclipsed by that of Averroes, whose commentary
on Aristotle is alluded to by Dante, and was studied by Thomas Aquinas
and the schoolman. Averroes’ system was rounded and complete, but
Ghazali was one of those ‘whose reach exceeds their grasp’; he was always
striking after something he had not attained, and stands in many respects
nearer to modern mind than Averroes. Renan, though far from sympathizing
with his religious earnestness, calls him ‘the most original mind among
Arabian philosophers.’”

The disciple of Al-Ghazali is perhaps of all Moslems the nearest to
the Gospel, and we may hope that when his works are carefully studied
and compared with the teaching of Christianity many may find in him a
schoolmaster to lead them to Christ. Educated Moslems of to-day may
well heed the warning with which Al-Ghazali closes his “Confessions”:
“The knowledge of which we speak is not derived from sources accessible
to human diligence, and that is why progress in mere worldly knowledge
renders the sinner more hardened in his revolt against God. True
knowledge, on the contrary, inspires in him who is initiated in it more
fear and more reverence, and raises a barrier of defense between him
and sin. He may slip and stumble, it is true, as is inevitable with one
encompassed by human infirmity, but these slips and stumbles will not
weaken his faith. The true Moslem succumbs occasionally to temptation
but he repents and will not persevere obstinately in the path of error.
I pray God the Omnipotent to place us in the ranks of His chosen, among
the number of those whom He directs in the path of safety, in whom
He inspires fervour lest they forget Him; whom He cleanses from all
defilement, that nothing may remain in them except Himself; yea of those
whom He indwells completely, that they may adore none beside Him.”

Being a Moslem, Al-Ghazali was either too proud to search for the true
historical facts of the Christian religion, or perhaps it would be more
charitable to say that he had no adequate opportunity, in spite of his
quotations and misquotations from the “Gospels.” Otherwise he could
have found there what would have met his heart-hunger and satisfied his
soul—the manifestation of God not in some intangible principle, but in a
living person, in Jesus Christ, who “is the image of the invisible God,
the first born of every creature. For by Him were all things created that
are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether
they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; in Him are
all things, and by Him all things consist.” (Colossians 1: 15-17.) Those
who dwell in Christ and in whom He dwells are a part of His spiritual
body. They are the branches of the living Vine. They are one in life and
purpose, although they remain conscious evermore of their own individual
existence; they are fitted progressively for a deeper communion with God.
To such a conception the Sufi never attained. Al-Ghazali admits that no
man has seen God at any time, but he failed to realize that “the Only
Begotten, Who is in the bosom of the Father, hath declared Him.” The
artificial glory of Mohammed in his case, as for centuries afterwards,
hid the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. Yet not altogether, as the next chapter will make clear.




IX

Jesus Christ in Al-Ghazali

    Jesus, the very thought of Thee
      With sweetness fills my breast;
    But sweeter far Thy face to see,
      And in Thy presence rest.

    Nor voice can sing, nor heart can frame,
      Nor can the memory find,
    A sweeter sound than Thy blest name,
      O Saviour of mankind!

    O hope of every contrite heart!
      O joy of all the meek!
    To those who fall, how kind Thou art!
      How good to those who seek!

    But what to those who find? Ah! this
      Nor tongue nor pen can show:
    The love of Jesus—what it is
      None but His loved ones know.

                —_Bernard of Clairvaux—almost
                  a contemporary (1091-1152)._


IX

JESUS CHRIST IN AL-GHAZALI

Jesus Christ is the Touch-Stone of character, the Master of all spiritual
leaders and the one supreme and infallible Judge who can pronounce
an unerring verdict concerning the truth of any religious system or
teaching. What place has Jesus in the teaching of the greatest of all
Moslem theologians, what place had He in the heart of this great mystic,
this seeker after God, who, whatever else he may have been, was utterly
sincere in his search? Al-Ghazali, as a student of the Koran, must have
noticed that in this book Christ occupies a high place; no fewer than
three of the chapters of the Koran, namely, that of Amram’s Family
(Surah III), that of The Table (Surah V), and that of Mary (Surah XIX),
derive their names from references to Jesus Christ and His work. The
very fact that Jesus Christ has a place in the literature of Islam,
and is acknowledged by all Moslems as one of their greater prophets
in itself therefore challenges comparison between Him and Mohammed.
Did Al-Ghazali ever meet this challenge and in how far did he compare
Mohammed with Christ? It is our purpose in this chapter to answer the
question by collating all the important references in the _Ihya_ and his
other works and then to draw some conclusions both as to his sources and
his opinions. The reader may judge for himself how far Al-Ghazali is a
schoolmaster to lead Moslems to Christ.

We search in vain among all his works for a sketch of the life of Christ
or of His teaching. Al-Ghazali doubtless had read and was probably well
acquainted with the only popular work known which gives a connected
account of the life of Jesus Christ according to Moslem sources,
namely, _Kitab qusus al Anbiya_ by _Ibn Ibrahim Ath-Thaʾlabi_, a doctor
of theology of the Shafi School, who died in A. H. 427 (A. D. 1036).
The fabulous character of this mass of traditions has been shown in a
translation of the section which deals with Jesus Christ.[83] Al-Ghazali
does not give altogether the same stories as are given by Ath-Thaʾlabi
but gives a great number of other incidents and reported sayings, many
of which resemble those found in the Gospels and others which are wholly
apocryphal.

The question again arises where did Al-Ghazali gain this knowledge of the
Gospel? Did he have access to a Persian or Arabic translation; or was
all this material which we have collated, the result of hearsay, gathered
from the lips of Christian monks and Jewish rabbis? It is perfectly
clear that he was acquainted with Old Testament tradition even more than
with that of the New Testament. There are scores of passages in which he
refers to the teachings of Moses, the Psalms of David, and the lives of
the Old Testament Prophets. We have already referred to translations of
the Bible into Arabic before the time of Al-Ghazali in our first chapter.
There is a tradition that “the People of the Book used to read the Torah
in Hebrew and interpret it in Arabic to the followers of Islam.” Another
tradition says that “Kaʾab the Rabbi brought a book to Omar the Caliph
and said, ‘Here is the Torah, read it.’”[84] We learn from the Jewish
Encyclopædia that “The _fihrist_ of al-Nadim mentions an Ahmed ibn Abd
Allah ibn Salam who translated the Bible into Arabic, at the time of
Haroun ar-Rashîd, and that _Fahr ud-Din ar-Razi_ mentions a translation
of Habbakuk by the son of _Rabban At-Tabari_. Many of the Arabic
Historians as At-Tabari, Masʾudi, Hamza, and Biruni cite passages and
recount the early history of the Jews in a most circumstantial manner.
Ibn Kutaibah, the historian (d. 889), says that he read the Bible; and
he even made a collection of Biblical passages in a work which has been
preserved by Ibn Jauzi of the twelfth century.” The first important
Arabic translation is that of Saʾadia Gaon (892-942). The influence of
this translation was in its way as great as that of Gaon’s philosophical
work.

A version of the Psalms was made by Hafiz al-Quti in the tenth century
and from internal evidence we know that the author had been Christian.
Another translation of the Old Testament in Arabic was made by the Jews
in Cairo in the middle of the eleventh century. The translation of
Saʾadia had become a standard work in Egypt, Palestine and Syria, by
the end of the tenth century, and it was revised about A. D. 1070.[85]
As regards Persian translations of the Bible we learn from the Jewish
Encyclopædia that according to Maimonides, the Pentateuch was translated
into Persian many hundred years previous to Mohammed. But this statement
cannot be further substantiated. In regard to Arabic versions of the
Gospels we have already given Dr. Kilgour’s statement.

Is it not probable that one or other of these versions of the Gospel was
known to Al-Ghazali? Does he not himself state: “I have _read_ in the
Gospel”? Not only does he reproduce the stories and sayings of Christ
from the Gospels but in some cases, as the reader will see, the very
words of the text. It is true that there is much apocryphal matter also
of which the canonical Gospels know nothing. We are in ignorance and we
must remain in ignorance whence Al-Ghazali derived this material; or did
he invent it even as the men of his day invented stories about Mohammed?

In the _Ihya_ we find the following incidents, real and apocryphal,
regarding the life of Christ on earth as a prophet and saint.[86] We
begin with Al-Ghazali’s witness to His sinlessness: “It is said that
the devil (may God curse him) appeared to Jesus and said, ‘Say there is
no God but God.’ He replied: ‘The word is true but I will not repeat it
after you.’” (Vol. III, p. 23.) Again: “It is related that when Jesus was
born, the devils came to Satan and said: ‘All the idols have fallen on
their faces.’ He said: ‘This has happened on your account.’ Then he flew
until he reached the regions of the earth; there he found Jesus had been
born and the angels were protecting him. So he returned to the devils
and said to them: ‘Truly a Prophet was born yesterday. No woman has ever
given birth before to a child when I was not present except in this
case.’ And that is why men now despair of worshipping idols.” (Vol. III,
p. 26.)

“It is related that Jesus one day was pillowing his head on a stone; and
the devil passed by and said: ‘O Jesus, now you have shown your love for
the world!’ Then Jesus picked up the stone, threw it at him and said:
‘Take it and the world.’” (Vol. III, p. 26.) We find this reference to
the days of His youth in Nazareth: “Some one said to Jesus: ‘Who gave you
your education?’ He replied: ‘No one. But I beheld the ignorance of the
foolish despicable and so I departed from it.’” “Jesus the Prophet was
of those who were especially favoured. Among the proofs of it is this
that he called down peace upon himself, for he said: ‘Peace be on me the
day I was born and the day I shall die and the day I shall be raised up
alive.’ And this was because of his peace of mind and his loving kindness
towards men. But as for John the son of Zachariah (on him be peace),
he took the place of awe and fear towards God and did not utter these
words until after they were repeated to him by his Creator, who said:
‘Peace be upon him the day he was born and the day he died and the day he
was raised again.’” This is an interesting critical comment on the two
passages referred to, which occur in the same chapter of the Koran, and I
have never seen them used elsewhere as an argument for the superiority of
Christ to John. (Vol. IV, p. 245.)

Al-Ghazali gives Jesus the usual titles given Him in the Koran, namely,
Son of Mary, Spirit of God, Word of God, Prophet and Apostle. But these
latter titles mean little because he endorses the strange Moslem theory
that there have been no less than 124,000 prophets since the world began.
In his book “_Al-Iqtasad_” he devotes a long argument to prove to the
Jews that Jesus was indeed a prophet, basing it upon his teaching and
miracles (pp. 83-86). In his _Jawahir ul-Koran_ he even classes Mary the
Virgin with the prophets and gives the list of these worthies in the
following curious order: Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Aaron, Zachariah,
John, Jesus, Mary, David, Solomon, Joshua, Lot, Idris, Khudra, Shuʾaib,
Elijah, and Mohammed!

Regarding the fasting of our Lord, Al-Ghazali says: “It is related that
Jesus (on him be peace) remained for sixty days without eating, engaged
in prayer; then he began to think of bread and behold a loaf of bread
appeared between his hands; then he sat weeping because he had forgotten
his prayers. And behold an old man came to him and Jesus said: ‘God bless
you, O servant of God. Call upon God Most High, for I too was in a sad
condition and I thought of bread until my prayer departed.’ Then the
old man prayed: ‘O God, if thou knowest any occasion when the thought
of bread entered my head when I was praying do not forgive me!’ Then he
said to Jesus: ‘When anything is brought to me to eat I eat it without
even thinking what it is.’” (Vol. III, p. 61.) The following story seems
to be based on the injunction of the Gospel “to pluck out the eye” that
offends: “It is related of Jesus (on him be peace) that he once went out
to pray for rain and when the people gathered together Jesus said to
them, ‘Whosoever of you hath committed a sin let him turn back,’ so they
all turned away and there was no one left in the cave with him save one.
And Jesus said unto him, ‘Have you any sin?’ He replied: ‘By God, I do
not know of any except that one day when I was praying a woman passed by
me and I looked upon her with this eye and when she had passed I put my
finger in my eye and plucked it out and followed her to ask her pardon.’
Then Jesus said to him, ‘Call upon God that I may believe in your
sincerity.’ Then the man prayed and the heavens were covered with clouds
and the rain poured down.” (Vol. II, p. 217.)

The following stories are related of the miracle-working Christ: “Said
the disciples to Jesus: ‘What do you think of the _dinar_-piece (money)?’
They said: ‘We think it is good.’ He said: ‘But as for me I value it and
ashes the same.’” (Vol. III, p. 161.) “It was said to the Prophet that
Jesus (upon him be peace) used to walk upon the water. He replied: ‘Had
he still more striven after holiness, he would have walked on the air.’”
(Vol. IV, p. 71.) “It is related that a certain robber waylaid travellers
among the children of Israel for forty years. Jesus passed by that way
and behind him walked a saint of the worshippers of the people of Israel,
one of his disciples. Said the robber to himself: ‘This is the Prophet
of God who passes by and with him one of his disciples. If I should come
down I would be the third.’” He then goes on to say that the robber
tried to show his humility by following not Christ but his disciple.
Jesus rebukes them both because of their sins. (Vol. IV, p. 110.) “It
is related that Jesus (on him be peace) passed by a blind man who was
a leper and lame of both feet because of paralysis and his flesh was
consumed by leprosy, and he was saying: ‘Praise be to God who has kept me
in good health and saved me from many things which have befallen others
of his creatures.’ Then Jesus said to him: ‘O thou friend, from what kind
of affliction do I see that you are free?’ and he replied: ‘O Spirit of
God, I am better than those in whose heart God has not put anything of
his knowledge and his grace.’ And Jesus said: ‘You have spoken truly.
Stretch forth your hand,’ and he stretched forth his hand and became of
perfect health both as to his body and his appearance, for God had taken
away all his sickness. So he accompanied Jesus and worshipped with him.”
(Vol. IV, p. 250.)

Al-Ghazali often pictures the power of Jesus to heal the sick, for Christ
as the Merciful One appeals to Moslems always and everywhere. We have for
example in the _Masnavi-i-Maʾanavi_ this beautiful picture which can be
found in prose, section by section in Al-Ghazali too.

    “The house of ʾIsa was the banquet of men of heart,
    Ho! afflicted one, quit not this door!
    From all sides the people ever thronged,
    Many blind and lame, and halt and afflicted,
    To the door of the house of ʾIsa at dawn,
    That with his breath he might heal their ailments.
    As soon as he had finished his orisons,
    That holy one would come forth at the third hour.
    He viewed these impotent folk, troop by troop,
    Sitting at his door in hope and expectation;
    He spoke to them, saying, ‘O stricken ones!
    The desires of all of you have been granted by God:
    Arise, walk without pain or affliction.
    Acknowledge the mercy and beneficence of God!’
    Then all, as camels whose feet are shackled,
    When you loose their feet in the road,
    Straightway rush in joy and delight to the halting-place
    So did they run upon their feet at his command.”

Many of the miracles, however, are puerile, as in this story: “A certain
man accompanied Jesus the Son of Mary (upon him be peace) and said:
‘I would like to be with you as your companion.’ So they departed and
arrived at the bank of a river and sat down and took their meal. Now they
had three loaves, so they ate two and one remained. Then Jesus arose and
went to the river to drink and returning did not find the remaining loaf.
He said to the man: ‘Who took the loaf?’ He replied: ‘I know not.’ So he
departed with his companion and saw a gazelle with her two young, and
Jesus called one of them and it came to him and he killed it and prepared
it and they ate together. Then he said to the young gazelle: ‘Get up by
God’s will,’ and it arose and departed. And he turned to the man and
said: ‘I ask you in the name of Him who worked this miracle before your
eyes, who took the loaf?’ He answered: ‘I know not.’ So they departed to
a cave and Jesus (upon whom be peace) began to collect the pebbles on the
sand and said: ‘Become bread by God’s permission!’ and they became bread;
then he divided them into three parts and said: ‘A third is for me, a
third is for you and a third is for the man who took the loaf,’ and the
man said: ‘I am he who took the loaf.’ Jesus replied: ‘Take all of it and
depart from me.’” (Vol. III, p. 188.) This story is related by Al-Ghazali
in his chapter on greed and covetousness to show that he who loves this
world cannot be a companion of the saints!

That Jesus was gentle in word and conduct seems to be the lesson taught
in the following two stories: “It is related of Jesus that once a pig
passed by him and he said to it: ‘Go in peace.’ They said to him: ‘O
Spirit of God, why do you say this to a pig?’ He replied: ‘I dislike to
accustom my tongue to use any evil words.’” (Vol. III, p. 87.) “It is
related that Jesus with his disciples once passed the carcase of a dog.
Said the disciples: ‘How noisome is the smell of this dog.’ Said Jesus
(on him be peace): ‘How beautiful is the shine of his white teeth,’ as
if he wanted to rebuke them for abusing the dog and to warn them not to
mention anything of what God has created save at its best.” (Vol. III, p.
150.) This incident is given by Jallal ud Din in poetic form:

    “One evening Jesus lingered in the market-place,
    Teaching the people parables of truth and grace,
    When in the square remote a crowd was seen to rise
    And stop with loathing gestures and abhorring cries.
    The Master and His meek disciples went to see
    What cause for this commotion and disgust could be,
    And found a poor dead dog beside the gutter laid:
    Revolting sight! at which each face its hate betrayed.
    One held his nose, one shut his eyes, one turned away,
    And all among themselves began aloud to say,
    ‘Detested creature! he pollutes the earth and air!’
    ‘His eyes are bleared!’ ‘His ears are foul!’ ‘His ribs are bare!’
    ‘In his torn hide there is not a decent shoe-string left!’
    ‘No doubt the execrable cur was hung for theft!’
    Then Jesus spake and dropped on him this saving breath:
    ‘Even pearls are dark before the whiteness of his teeth!’”

We add the following quotations which set forth the poverty, humility
and homelessness of the Christ taken from Al-Ghazali’s “Precious Pearl”:
“Consider Jesus Christ, for it is related of him that he owned nothing
save one garment of wool which he wore for twenty years and that he took
nothing with him on all his wanderings save a cruse and a rosary and a
comb. One day he saw a man drinking from a stream with his hands, so he
cast away the cruse and did not use it again. He saw another man combing
his beard with his fingers so he threw away his comb and did not use it
again. And Jesus was accustomed to say, ‘My steed is my legs, and my
houses are the caves of the earth, and my food are its vegetables, and
my drink is from its rivers, and my dwelling-place among the sons of
Adam!’” In another connection he writes: “It was said to Jesus: ‘If you
would take possession of a house and live there it would be better for
you,’ and he said: ‘Where are the houses of those who lived before us?’”
(_Ihya_, Vol. III, p. 140.)

A story is related (Vol. IV, p. 326) to show that Christ knew what was in
the hearts of men and could change their purposes by prayer to God. In
this case He makes an old man cease from his work of cleaning the ground,
go to sleep and afterwards return to his work.

Another story is as follows: “It is related that Jesus (upon him be
peace) in his wanderings passed by a man asleep, wrapped up in his
garment. So he wakened him and said: ‘O thou that sleepest! arise
and make mention of God.’ He replied: ‘What do you want from me? I
have forsaken the world to its own.’ Jesus replied: ‘Sleep on then my
beloved.’” (Vol. IV, p. 140.) “It is related concerning Jesus that he sat
in the shade of a wall of a certain man, who saw him and made him get up,
but he replied: ‘You have not made me arise but verily God made me arise.
He does not wish me to delight in the shade by day.’” (Vol. IV, p. 163.)
The least of life’s pleasures is not for the ascetic saint.

“Said John to Jesus (on them be peace): ‘Do not be angry.’ Jesus replied:
‘I am not able to cease from anger altogether for I am human.’ Then said
John: ‘Do not desire property.’ Jesus replied: ‘That is possible.’” (Vol.
III, p. 114.)

He quotes the following prayer of Jesus (Vol. I, p. 222): “Jesus was
accustomed to say to God, ‘O God, I have arisen from my sleep, and am not
able to ward off that which I hate and am not able to possess the benefit
of that which I desire and the matter rests in hands other than mine. And
I have pledged myself to my work and there is no man so poor as I am. O
God, let not mine enemies rejoice over me and let not my friends deal
ill with me, and let not my afflictions come to me in the matter of my
religion. And do not allow the world to occupy my care and do not allow
the unmerciful to overcome me, O Thou Eternal!’”

“It is related concerning Jesus (on him be peace) that God spoke to him
saying: ‘Though you serve me with the worship of the people of heaven and
earth and do not have love towards God in your heart but hatred toward
Him it will not enrich you at all.’” (Vol. II, p. 210.) “God Most High
said to Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Verily when I look upon the secret
thoughts of my servant and do not find in them love either for this
world or the world to come I fill him with my own love and I put him in
my safe-keeping.’” (Vol. IV, p. 258.) In the “Alchemy of Happiness” we
already found allusion to this subject: “Jesus (upon him be peace) saw
the world in the form of an ugly old hag. He asked her how many husbands
she had possessed; she replied that they were countless. He asked whether
they had died or been divorced; she said that she had slain them all. ‘I
marvel,’ he said, ‘at the fools who see what you have done to others,
and still desire you.’” “Jesus (on him be peace) said, ‘The lover of the
world is like a man drinking sea-water; the more he drinks, the more
thirsty he gets, till at last he perishes with thirst unquenched.’”

Al-Ghazali, however, never seems to have drawn the conclusion from
the life of Christ which a careful study of the Gospel would have
made possible. Namely, that a true renunciation of the world is only
possible in the _service of others_ and not by withdrawing from men.
Mohammedan mysticism has always resulted in two evils, as Major Durie
Osborn points out: “It has dug a deep gulf between those who can know
God and those who must wander in darkness, feeding upon the husks of
rites and ceremonies. It has affirmed with emphasis, that only by a
complete renunciation of the world is it possible to attain the true end
of man’s existence. Thus all the best and truest natures—the men who
might have put a soul in the decaying Church of Islam—have been cut off
from their proper task to wander about in deserts and solitary places,
or expend their lives in idle and profitless passivity disguised under
the title of ‘spiritual contemplation.’ (_zikr_) But this has only been
part of the evil. The logical result of Pantheism is the destruction of
the moral law. If God be all in all, and man’s apparent individuality a
delusion of the perceptive faculty, there exists no will which can act,
no conscience which can reprove and applaud.... Thousands of reckless and
profligate spirits have entered the orders of the dervishes to enjoy the
license thereby obtained. Their affectation of piety is simply a cloak
for the practice of sensuality; their emancipation from the ritual of
Islam involves a liberation also from its moral restraints. And _thus
a movement, animated at its outset by a high and lofty purpose, has
degenerated into a fruitful source of ill. The stream which ought to
have expanded into a fertilizing river, has become a vast swamp, exhaling
vapours charged with disease and death._”

Regarding the _teaching_ of Jesus we find the following passages in the
_Ihya_. I have indicated the parallel passages in the New Testament where
possible. Some of them are taken from the Gospel according to Matthew,
especially from the Sermon on the Mount. These are given first and then
the apocryphal sayings, for it is difficult to follow any logical order.

“Said Jesus: ‘If a man come to you when he is fasting let him anoint
his head and wipe his lips that men may not say he is fasting; and if
he gives alms with his right hand let not his left hand know; and if he
prays let him put a curtain over his door, for verily God divines his
trouble even as He does our daily food.’” (Vol. III, p. 203.)[87]

“Said Jesus (upon him be peace), ‘Whosoever shall do and teach shall be
called great in the Kingdom of Heaven.’” (Vol. I, p. 6; cf. Matt. 5: 19.)

“Said Jesus, ‘Do not hang pearls on the necks of swine; for wisdom is
better than pearls.’” (Vol. I, p. 43; cf. Matt. 7: 6.) “Said Jesus, ‘How
long will ye describe the right road to those who are going astray and
ye yourselves remain with those who are perplexed?’” (Vol. I, p. 44; cf.
Matt. 23: 13.)

“Said Jesus, ‘The teachers of evil are like a big stone which has fallen
on the mouth of a well so that the water cannot reach the sown fields.’”
(Vol. I, p. 45; cf. Matt. 23: 13.)

“Said Jesus, ‘How can that man belong to the people of wisdom who from
the beginning of his life until the end looks only after the things of
the world?’” (Vol. I, p. 46; cf. Matt. 6: 33.)

Again he makes God address Jesus as follows: ‘O Son of Mary, preach to
yourself for if you preach to yourself you will be able to preach to man
and if not fear him.’ (Vol. I, p. 47.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Blessed are those who humble themselves
in this world, for they shall be the possessors of thrones on the day of
judgment. Blessed are those who make peace between men in this world, for
they shall inherit Paradise on the day of resurrection. Blessed are they
who are poor in this world, for they shall behold God Most High on the
day of resurrection.’” (Vol. III, p. 237; cf. Matt. 5: 3-9.)

“Some one said to Jesus: ‘Let me go with you on your wanderings.’ He
replied: ‘Dispose of all that you have and follow me.’” (Vol. IV, p. 170;
cf. Luke 9: 57 and Matt. 19: 21.) Here two passages are mixed.

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘It has been told of ancient times: a
tooth for a tooth and a nose for a nose; but I say unto you, do not
return evil for evil, but whosoever strikes you on the right cheek, turn
to him the left also; and whosoever desireth you to go with him a mile go
with him twain; and whosoever taketh away your cloak give him your inner
garment also.’” (Vol. IV, p. 52; cf. Matt. 5: 30-41.) These verses seem
to be fairly accurate quotations, though not without some confusion, from
some translation of the Sermon on the Mount.

“Said the disciples to Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Behold this mosque how
beautiful it is.’ He replied: ‘O my nation! O my nation! In truth I say
unto you, God will not suffer a stone to remain upon a stone in it but
he will destroy it because of the sins of its people. Truly God does not
care for gold and silver nor does he care for these stones at which ye
marvel; but the things which God loves most are pure hearts, with them
God can build up the earth, and if they are not good they are wasted.’”
(“_Ihya_,” Vol. III, p. 288; cf. Matt. 24: 2.)

“Said Jesus: ‘Do not take the world for your master, for she will make
you her slave. Lay up your treasures with him who will not lose them.
For he who lays up treasure in the earth fears that which will destroy
them; but he who has treasures with God does not fear for anything that
may injure them’ (Matt. 6: 9-21). And Jesus said also: ‘O company of the
Apostles, behold I have poured out the world upon the ground, therefore
do not take hold of it again after me, for the evil of this world is
that men disobey God in it. And the evil of the world also is that the
other world cannot be obtained without abandoning the present. Therefore
pass through the world but do not build in it. Know that the root of all
sin is the love of the world and perchance the desire of an hour will
cause those who follow it to lose the other world altogether.’ He also
said: ‘I have cast the world before you and ye have sat upon its back, do
not therefore suffer kings or women to dispute its possession with you.
As for kings, do not dispute with them for its possession, for they will
not give it back to you. And as for women, guard yourselves against them
by prayer and fasting.’” (Vol. III, p. 139.) “Said Jesus: ‘The love of
this world and of the world to come cannot abide in the same heart even
as water and fire cannot abide in one vessel.’” (Vol. III, p. 140.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘O ye teachers of wickedness! Ye fast and
pray and give alms and do not what ye command others and ye teach that
which ye do not understand. How evil is that which ye do. Ye repent only
with words but your deeds are without value. In vain do ye purify your
skins while your hearts are covered with evil. I say unto you, be not as
the sieve from which the good flour passes out and all that remains in it
are the siftings. Thus ye make the truth to pass out of your mouths, but
deceit remains in your hearts, O servants of the world! How can any one
understand the other world while his desires cling to this? Of a truth I
say unto you that your hearts shall weep because of your deeds. Ye have
put the world upon your tongues and trampled upon good deeds. Of a truth
I say unto you, ye have corrupted your future life, for ye are more in
love with the good things of this world than of the good things of the
world to come. Which of the children suffers greater loss than ye do,
if only ye knew it! Woe be to you! How long will ye describe the right
way to those who are in darkness and ye yourselves remain in the place
of doubt? It is as if ye invite the children of the world to forsake its
pleasure in order to leave it for yourselves a little while. Woe be to
you! What benefit is it to the darkened house if the candle be put on its
roof while the rooms of the house remain in darkness? In the same way ye
will not be enriched if the light of knowledge is on your lips, while
your hearts remain in darkness. O ye servants of the world! what of your
righteousness or your freedom? Perchance the world will pluck you up by
the roots and cast you upon your faces and drag you in the dust. It will
expose your sins upon your foreheads, then it will drive you before it
until you are delivered up to the angel of judgment, every one of you
naked. Then shall you be punished by your evil deeds.’” (Vol. III, p.
183; cf. Matt. 23: 1-27.)

“Do not be anxious about the food of to-morrow, for perhaps to-morrow
will be your time of death.” (Vol. IV, p. 330; cf. Matt. 6: 34.)

“Behold the bird, it does not sow nor reap nor lay up store and God Most
High provides for it.” (Vol. IV, p. 190; cf. Matt. 6: 26.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘He is not wise who does not rejoice
when he enters upon trials and sicknesses of the body and loss of his
possessions; for in it he may find atonement for his sins.’” (Vol. IV, p.
205; cf. Matt. 5: 10.)

“It is related of Jesus that he said: ‘If you see a young man
passionately fond of prayer to God you will know that he has escaped all
temptations.’” (Vol. IV, p. 221; cf. Matt 26: 41.) The reference might be
to Christ’s words in the Garden of Gethsemane.

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Serve God by hating the people who
transgress, and draw near to God by departing from them. Seek the
good-will of God by hating them.’ They said to him: ‘O spirit of God,
with whom then shall we keep company?’ He answered them: ‘Keep company
with those who make you remember God and those whose words improve your
conduct and those whose example makes you earnest for the world to
come.’” (Vol. II, p. 110.)

“It is related of Jesus (on him be peace) that he said to the children
of Israel: ‘Where does that which ye sow grow?’ They replied: ‘In the
good ground,’ and he said: ‘Verily I say unto you, wisdom does not grow
except in the heart which is good soil.’” (Vol. IV, p. 256; cf. Matt. 13:
1-9.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Truly the harvest does not grow on the
mountain but in the plain. Thus wisdom works in the heart of those that
are humble and not in the heart of the proud.’” (Vol. III, p. 240; cf.
Matt. 13: 23.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Fine garments make proud looks.’” (Vol.
III, p. 247.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘What ails you that ye come in the
garments of monks and your hearts are the hearts of ravening wolves?
Wear the garments of monks if you wish but humble your hearts with godly
fear.’” (Vol. III, p. 247; cf. Matt. 7: 15.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘O company of disciples, call upon God
Most High that he may make light for you this terror, namely, death. For
I fear death in such a fashion that I stand afraid of the same.’” Is it
possible that Al-Ghazali here refers to the agony in Gethsemane? The
chapter in which this passage occurs is entitled “The terrors of death.”
(Vol. IV, p. 324; cf. Matt. 26: 38.)

We now give other “sayings” of Jesus, as Al-Ghazali himself does, in
somewhat confused order. Although not quotations or even misquotations
from the Gospels, they are of interest as completing the list and also
because they show what Al-Ghazali and other Moslems thought was the
teaching of Jesus the Prophet.

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘How many a sound body and beautiful face
and eloquent tongue will to-morrow cry out in the fires of hell!’” (Vol.
IV, p. 383.)

“Said Jesus, ‘Which of you can build a house upon the waves of the sea?
Such is the world; therefore do not take it as an abiding place.’” (Vol.
III, p. 141.)

“They said to Jesus, ‘Teach us the secret of the love of God.’ He
replied: ‘Hate the world and God will love you.’” (Vol. III, p. 141; cf.
James 4: 4.)

“Said Jesus, ‘O my disciples, be satisfied with the least of the world
as long as your religion is at peace even as the people of the world
are satisfied with the least of religion and their possessions are at
peace.’” (Vol. III, p. 142.)

“Said Jesus, ‘O thou who seekest the world for the sake of pure gold, the
forsaking of the world is greater treasure.’” (Vol. III, p. 142.)

“They asked Jesus (on him be peace) which is the best of good works. He
replied: ‘To accept whatever God does with pleasure and to love him.’”
(Vol. IV, p. 258.)

“Said Jesus the Son of Mary (on him be peace), ‘Woe to the lover of this
world how soon he shall die and leave it and all that is in it. The world
deceives him and he trusts it and has confidence in it, etc.’” (Vol.
III, p. 141; cf. Luke 12: 21.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Mortify then your bodies that your soul
may see your Lord.’” (Vol. III, p. 56; cf. Rom. 8: 13.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘The likeness of him who teaches good
works and does not do them is that of a woman who commits adultery in
secret and then the result of her crime becomes evident to all around her
from her condition.’” (Vol. I, p. 48.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Whosoever turns away a beggar from his
house the angels will not visit that dwelling for seven days.’” (Vol. II,
p. 162.) This saying is often quoted by Moslems to-day. They all believe
Jesus was the friend of the poor and needy.

“Said Jesus (upon him be peace), ‘Blessed is he to whom God has taught
his book; he will not die a proud oppressor.’” (Vol. III, p. 235.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Blessed is the eye which sleeps and
does not regard transgression but is wide-awake for that which is not
sinful.’” (Vol. IV, p. 260.)

“The disciples said to Jesus (on him be peace), ‘What is the best of good
works?’ He replied: ‘That which is done to God and in which you seek the
praise of no one else.’” (Vol. IV, p. 273.)

“Said the disciples of Jesus the Son of Mary: ‘O Spirit of God! Is there
any one on earth like thee?’ He replied: ‘Yes. For whosoever is girded
with the remembrance of God and is silent because of this and who looks
only for the favour of God, he is like me.’” (Vol. IV, p. 305.)

“Said Jesus, ‘Beware of the evil look, for when it is in the heart it
produces lust and evil desire.’” (Vol. IV, p. 74; cf. Matt. 5: 28.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Whosoever multiplies lies his beauty
departs from him: and whosoever increases care his body becomes ill; and
whosoever has a bad character punishes himself.’” (Vol. III, p. 85.)

“Said Jesus: ‘The greatest sin with God is that his servant should say,
“God Knows,” concerning something which he knows is untrue, or that he
tell lies concerning what he has seen in his dreams.’” (Vol. III, p. 98.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace) to his disciples: ‘How would you act if
you saw one of your brothers sleeping and the wind had taken off his
garment?’ They said: ‘We would cover him.’ Said Jesus: ‘No, but you would
expose him.’ They said: ‘God forbid! Who would do such a thing!’ He
replied: ‘When one of you hears a word against his brother he exaggerates
it and spreads the report to others!’” (Vol. II, p. 142.)

“It is related that Jesus (upon him be peace) said, ‘O company of
disciples, ye are free of transgression, but we the company of apostles
are free of infidelity.’” (Vol. IV, p. 124.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘With difficulty will the rich man enter
paradise.’” (Vol. IV, p. 140; cf. Christ’s saying, Matt. 19: 23.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Truly I do not love a fixed dwelling
place and I dislike the pleasure of the world.’” (Vol. IV, p. 140.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Do not look upon the property of the
people of this world for its glory is as nothing in the light of your
faith.’” (Vol. IV, p. 144.)

“It was said to Jesus: ‘If you will allow us we will build a house and
worship God in it.’ He replied: ‘Go and build a house upon the sea.’ They
said: ‘How can we build upon such a foundation?’ He replied: ‘How can
your worship exist together with your love of the world?’” (Vol. IV, p.
158.)

“It is related that Jesus said: ‘Four things do not come to us except
with difficulty. Silence, which is the first principle of worship,
humility, the abundant remembrance of God and poverty in all things.’”
(Vol. IV, p. 159.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Verily I say unto you, whosoever seeketh
heaven let him eat barley-bread and sleep on the dunghill with the dogs.
This is enough for me.’” (Vol. IV, p. 164.)

“Jesus was accustomed to say, ‘O children of Israel, let the water of the
brook suffice you and the vegetable of the field and the barley loaf;
and beware of the white loaf for it will keep you from worship.’” (Vol.
IV, p. 164.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘My food is hunger; all my thoughts are
fear of God; my dress is wool; my warming-place in winter is the rays of
the sun; my candle is the moon; my steed is my legs; my food is fruit
that springs from the ground; I go to bed and have nothing and arise
without anything; and yet there is no one richer than I am.’” (Vol. IV,
p. 146.)

“Said Jesus (upon him be peace), ‘The world is a bridge; therefore cross
over it and do not build on it.’” (Vol. III, p. 149.)

“Said Jesus (on him be peace), ‘Whosoever seeks the world is like him who
drinks water from the salt sea. The more he drinks the more he thirsts.’”
(Vol. III, p. 149.) This occurs for the second time, but Al-Ghazali loves
to repeat his own sayings as well, often in the same book.

“It is related in the gospels that whosoever shall ask for forgiveness of
him who praises him, has driven away the devil.” (Vol. III, p. 127.)

The following quotations or references to the Gospel occur in some of his
shorter works. In the “Alchemy of Happiness,” there is this reference
to the Gospel: “Whosoever sows reaps, whosoever sets out arrives, and
whosoever seeks finds.” (Cf. Matt. 7: 7.) We have already quoted the
words from his epistle, “O Child”: “Verily I have seen in the Gospels,
etc.” In the same epistle he refers to the parable of Dives and Lazarus:
“When the people of hell will say to the people of the garden, ‘Give us a
little water from that which God has granted you to cool our tongues.’”
He quotes Jesus as saying: “I was not unable to raise the dead, but I was
unable to cure the folly of fools,” and quotes the Golden Rule in several
places without acknowledging its source as being the Gospel of Jesus.

All this and what he says in his “Alchemy of Happiness” about the love of
God leaves no doubt in my mind that he had read the New Testament. It is
a sort of Moslem Version of St. John’s Epistles and St. John’s Gospel.
The great Mystic gives seven signs of love to God. The first is not to be
afraid of death. The second is to prefer the love of God to any worldly
object. The third sign of a man’s love to God is that the remembrance
of God is always fresh in his heart. He never ceases to meditate upon
God. Every man thinks and calls to mind an object in proportion to his
love to it. The fourth is love and respect for the Koran. The fifth,
secret prayer. The sixth, to find the worship of God delightful. And the
seventh sign of love to God is, “That a man loves the sincere friends
and obedient servants of God, and regards them all as his friends. He
regards all the enemies of God as his enemies and abhors them. And God
thus speaks in his eternal word: ‘His companions are terrible towards
the infidels, and tender towards each other.’ A Sheikh was once asked,
‘Who are the friends of the exalted and blessed God?’ He replied: ‘The
friends of God are those who are more compassionate to the friends of God
themselves, than a father or a mother to their children.’”[88] (Compare
Psalm 103.)

There seems a great difference between Al-Ghazali as dogmatic theologian,
always compelled to agree with the Koran, and Al-Ghazali as the Mystic,
when he begins to speculate and lift the veil. We are constantly reminded
of the words of Anselm in his great work on the existence of God: “I do
not attempt, O Lord, to penetrate Thy depths, for I by no means think
my intellect equal to them; but I long to understand in some degree
Thy truth, which my heart believes and loves, _for I do not seek to
understand that I may believe, but I believe that I may understand_.”

Whenever Al-Ghazali speaks of God’s nearness to us and of the soul’s
desire for human fellowship with the creator, he comes very close to the
Christian idea of the Incarnation, and yet always stops short of it.
In his “Alchemy of Happiness,” for example, he mentions as the fourth
cause of love to God the affinity that exists between man and his Maker,
referring to the saying of the Prophet: “Verily God created man in
his own likeness.” Immediately afterwards, however, he goes on to say:
“This is a somewhat dangerous topic to dwell upon, as it is beyond the
understanding of common people, and even intelligent men have stumbled
in treating of it, and come to _believe in incarnation_ and union with
God. Still the affinity which does exist between man and God disposes of
the objection of those theologians mentioned above, who maintain that
man cannot love a Being who is not of his own species. However great a
distance between them, man can love God because of the affinity indicated
in the saying, ‘God created man in His own likeness.’”

Al-Ghazali would doubtless have accepted the statement in the Gospel, “No
man hath seen God at any time,” but he omits “the only Begotten Son who
is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him.” In speaking of the
vision of God he says, “All Moslems profess to believe that the Vision of
God is the summit of human felicity because it is so stated in the Law;
but with many this is a mere lip-profession which arouses no emotion in
their hearts. This is quite natural, for how can a man long for a thing
of which he has no knowledge? We will endeavour to show briefly why the
vision of God is the greatest happiness to which a man can attain.

“In the first place, every one of man’s faculties has its appropriate
function which it delights to fulfill. This holds good of them all,
from the lowest bodily appetite to the highest form of intellectual
apprehension. But even a comparatively low form of mental exertion
affords greater pleasure than the satisfaction of bodily appetites. Thus
if a man happens to be absorbed in a game of chess, he will not come to
his meal though repeatedly summoned. And the greater the subject-matter
of our knowledge, the greater is our delight in it; for instance, we
would take more pleasure in knowing the secrets of a king than the
secrets of a vizier. Seeing then that God is the highest possible object
of knowledge, the knowledge of Him must afford more delight than any
other. He who knows God, even in this world, dwells, as it were, in a
paradise, ‘the breadth of which is as the breadth of the heavens and the
earth,’ a paradise the fruits of which no envy can prevent him plucking,
and the extent of which is not narrowed by the multitude of those who
occupy it.” (See 1 John 4: 7-21.)

“But the delight of knowledge still falls short of the delight of vision,
just as our pleasure in thinking of those we love is much less than the
pleasure afforded by the actual sight of them. Our imprisonment in bodies
of clay and water and entanglement in the things of sense constitute a
veil which hides the vision of God from us, although it does not prevent
our attaining to some knowledge of Him. For this reason God said to Moses
on Mount Sinai, ‘Thou shalt not see Me.’”

In this book also we are reminded of the statement that only “the pure in
heart” can see God, and it seems scarcely possible that what Al-Ghazali
here teaches is not based on a knowledge of the Gospel. He says: “He in
whose heart the love of God has prevailed over all else will derive more
joy from this vision than he in whose heart it has not so prevailed;
just as in the case of two men with equally powerful eyesight gazing
on a beautiful face, he who already loves the possessor of that face
will rejoice in beholding it more than he who does not. For perfect
happiness, mere knowledge is not enough unaccompanied by love, and the
love of God cannot take possession of a man’s heart till it is purified
from the love of the world, which purification can only be effected by
abstinence and austerity.” How close is this teaching to the words of
Christ, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God”! It is
the _vision of God_ which Al-Ghazali sought through all his religious
experiences as the highest good in this world and in the next. Yet with
all his efforts to explain the nature of the soul and of God, he still
finds himself before a blank wall. He covets the vision of God but cannot
shake himself free from the Moslem conception that God is unknowable and
that nothing in creation resembles the Creator. As Muhammed Iqbal says:
“To this day it is difficult to define with accuracy Al-Ghazali’s view
of the nature of God. In him, like Borger and Solger in Germany, Sufi
pantheism and the _Ashʾarite_ dogma of personality appear to harmonize
together, a reconciliation which makes it difficult to say whether he
was a Pantheist, or a Personal Pantheist of the type of Lotze. The soul,
according to Al-Ghazali, perceives things. But perception as an attribute
can exist only in a substance or essence which is absolutely free from
all the attributes of body. In his _Al-Madnun_, he explains why the
prophet declined to reveal the nature of the soul. There are, he says,
two kinds of men: ordinary men and thinkers. The former who look upon
materiality as a condition of existence, cannot conceive an immaterial
substance. The latter are led, by their logic, to a conception of the
soul which sweeps away all difference between God and the individual
soul. Al-Ghazali, therefore, realized the Pantheist drift of his own
inquiry and preferred silence as to the ultimate nature of the soul.”[89]

We have seen what Al-Ghazali teaches regarding the life and character of
Jesus and also of God’s relation to us through the love of those who seek
Him with all their hearts. Are these only Moslems, or is there a wider
love of God? Are _all_ souls in His keeping?

What were Al-Ghazali’s ideas regarding the salvation of those not in the
fold of Islam? We have two striking passages in this connection which
seem to contradict each other. They were probably written at different
periods of his life. The first passage which is remarkable indeed for
his day and his place in Islam occurs on page 22 of his book _Faisul
Al-Tafriqa Bain al Islam wa ’l Zandiqa_ and reads as follows: “I here
state that most Christians of the Greeks and of the Turks in our day will
be included in the mercy of God. Namely, those who are on the confines of
the empire and to whom the call to embrace Islam has not come. For they
consist of three classes: One class has never heard the name of Mohammed
(upon whom be prayers and peace) and they are excusable. Another class
have heard of his name and title and the miracles which were wrought
by him; they who live as neighbours among Moslems; these are the true
infidels and sceptics. And the other class are between these two; they
have heard of the name of Mohammed (upon him be prayers and peace),
but have not heard of his title and character. On the contrary they
have heard from their youth up that he is a liar and deceiver called
Mohammed, who pretended to have the gift of prophecy: in the same way as
our children have heard of a false prophet in Khorasan called Al-Mukaffa
who pretended to be a prophet. And these last, in my opinion, belong
to the first class as to their hope for the future.” This account is
the more remarkable because in this very chapter he says that God told
Adam, according to Tradition, “that out of a thousand of his descendants
nine-hundred-and-ninety-nine go to hell and one only will be saved.”

On the last page of the _Ihya_, however, Al-Ghazali expresses the
opinion that on the day of judgment not a single Mohammedan, whatever
be his character, will enter the fire! He then quotes a tradition
which says that for every Moslem designed to go to hell God will at
the last day substitute a Jew or a Christian, evidently approving
this substitution-doctrine as satisfactory to God’s mercy towards
all who confess Mohammed and to His decree that hell shall be filled
with its quota of unbelievers. (See Surah 50: 29.) The last page of
the _Ihya_, alas, again shows the Moslem spirit of intolerance which
prevails even to-day. Men do not remember the more liberal judgment in
his other treatise. Al-Ghazali’s attitude towards Christianity and his
quotations from the Gospel narrative did much to leaven Persian thought
and gave Jesus of Nazareth a large place in later mysticism especially
in the foremost mystical poet, the immortal author of the _Masnavi_,
Jallal-ud-Din Ar-Rumi. He draws the great Lesson from the life of Christ
which Al-Ghazali only hints at in his quotations; namely that Jesus is
the Life-giver:

    “Thyself reckon dead, and then thou shalt fly
    Free, free, from the prison of earth to the sky!
    Spring may come, but on granite will grow no green thing:
    It was barren in winter, ’tis barren in spring;
    And granite man’s heart is, till grace intervene.
    And, crushing it, clothe the long barren with green,
    When the fresh breath of Jesus shall touch the heart’s core,
    It will live, it will breathe, it will blossom once more.”

The City of Mashad, close to the ruins of Tus, where Al-Ghazali was born
and where he died, has been truly described as the Mecca of the Persian
world. Its streets are crowded with a hundred thousand pilgrims every
year. The American Presbyterian Church has an important work there, and
the Bible Societies report thousands of copies of the Bible sold there.
“We have inundated the City of Mashad with the Word of God,” wrote the
late Mr. Esselstyn; “in the bazaars I have repeatedly been warned some
one will kill me if we do not stop selling the Scriptures and preaching.
But ‘Lo, I am with you always’ keeps ringing in my ears and we continue.
The Scriptures that have been sold in and around Mashad are sown seed and
in due time we shall reap if we faint not.”

To-day the black-browed Afghan, the Uzbek Tartar, the dervish,
travel-stained and footsore, nay the poorest lad of Khorasan can buy the
whole story of what Jesus did and taught. No Moslem is now dependent on
Al-Ghazali’s few quotations from the Gospel. A new day has dawned for
Persia and the Near East. Everywhere the New Testament is better known
than any of the ninety-nine works of Al-Ghazali, and we may also say,
without exaggeration, that the New Testament finds a larger circle of
readers. The mystics in Islam are near the Kingdom of God and for them
Al-Ghazali may be used as a schoolmaster to lead men to Christ. Did not
the author of the _Gulshan-i-Raz_ (the Garden of Mysteries) write: “Dost
thou know what Christianity is? I shall tell it thee. It digs up thine
own Ego, and carries thee to God. Thy soul is a monastery wherein dwells
oneness, thou art Jerusalem, where the Eternal is enthroned; the Holy
Spirit works this miracle, for know that God’s being rests in the Holy
Spirit as in His Own Spirit.” And such seekers after God to-day will
find those who will lead them to CHRIST. For, as Dr. J. Rendel Harris
expressed it: “All of us who love Christ are beginning to realize that we
live in the same street and are on the same telephone, some of us that we
are lodged next door to one another and can knock on the partitions, a
few that we are all under the same roof and all within arm’s length and
heart reach.”




Appendix


A. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abu Nasir Abd ul Wahab Taqi id Din as Subqi.—Tabaqat-ash-Shafaʾiya al
Kubra. Vol. IV, pp. 101-102.

Barbier de Meynard, M. C.—Traduction nouvelle du traite de Ghazzali
intitule le Préservatif de l’erreur et notices sur les extases (des
Soufis). (Journal Asiatique, Paris, 1877.)

Brockelmann, Carl—Geschichte der Arabischen Litteratur, Weimar, 1898, 2
vols.

Chenery, Thomas—The Assemblies of Al-Hariri, London, 1878, Trans.

Clark, Edson L.—The Arabs and the Turks, Boston, 1875.

DeBoer, T. J.—The History of Philosophy in Islam, London, 1903.

Dozy, (Trans. by Francis Griffin Stokes)—Spanish Islam, London, 1913.

De Vaun, Cara—Gazali (Les Grand Philos.—Felix Alcan), Paris, 1912.

Encyclopædia Britannica.

Field, Claud—The Alchemy of Happiness, by Ghazali (from Hindustani).

  — The Confessions of Al-Ghazali, London, 1909, Trans.

  — Mystics and Saints of Islam, London, 1910.

  — Persian Literature, London (undated).

Fortescue, Adrian—The Lesser Eastern Churches, London, 1913.

Gairdner, W. H. T.—Al-Ghazali’s Mishkat-ul-Anwar and the Ghazali
Problem, Der Islam, Bd. V, Heft 2/3.

Gardner, W. R. W.—Al-Ghazali. In Islam Series, Christian Literature
Society for India, 1919.

Gautier, Lucien—Ad-Dourra al-fakhira: La perle precieuse de Ghazali.
Traite d’eschatologie musulmane, publie ... avec une traduction
francaise. Geneve, 1878.

Gosche, von R.—Über Ghazzali, Leben und Werke, Berlin, 1859.

Huart, Clement—A History of Arabic Literature, London, 1903.

Hurgronje, Dr. C. Snouck—Mekka, Haag, 1886.

Ibn Khallikan.

Jackson, A. V. Williams—“From Constantinople to the Home of Omar
Khayyam”: New York, Macmillan Company, 1911.

Jayakar, Lt. Col. A. S. G.—Ad-Damiri’s Hayat Al-Hayawan (under
_Al-Hammam_), Vol. I, London, 1906, Trans.

Jewish Encyclopædia, The.

Journal of The American Oriental Society, Vol. XX, pp. 71-132. New Haven,
Conn., 1898.

Lane-Poole, Stanley—Mediæval India under Mohammedan Rule, in the Story of
the National Series, London, 1903.

Mohammed Iqbal—The Development of Metaphysics in Persia, London, 1908.

Miguel Asin et Palacios—Al Gazel: Domatica, moral, Ascetica. (Zargoza.
Spain, 1901.)

  — _Logia et Agrapha Domini Jesu_ apud Moslemicos Scriptores, etc.
  (Latin and Arabic) Firmin-Didot and Co., Paris, 1917.

Le Strange, G.—Baghdad during the Abbasid Caliphate, Oxford, 1900.

Macdonald, D. B.—Aspects of Islam, New York, 1911.

  — Emotional religion in Islam as affected by music and singing.
  Being a translation of a book of the Ihya ʿUlum ad-Din of Al-Ghazzali
  with analysis, annotation and appendices. (Royal Asiatic Society.
  Journal. 1901.)

  — Encyclopædia of Islam, Leyden—art., “Ghazali.”

  — The Life of Al-Ghazali with special reference to his religious
  experiences and opinions (Journal American Oriental Society).

  — Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and Constitutional Theory. 1903.

  — The Religious Attitude and Life in Islam, Chicago, 1909.

Murtadha—Introduction to the Celebrated Commentary of the _Ihya_ entitled
_Ithaf ul Saʾada_. Cairo Edition.

Nicholson, Reynold A.—Kashf Al-Mahjub, the oldest Persian Treatise on
Sufism by Al-Hujwiri, London, 1911.

  — Literary History of the Arabs, New York, 1907.

Nöldeke, Theodore—Sketches from Eastern History, London, 1892.

Osborn, Robert Durie—Islam Under the Khalifs of Baghdad, London, 1878.

Saladin, H.—Manuel d’art Musulman, Paris, 1907, Vol. I.

Tyrwitt, W. S. S.—Cairo, Jerusalem and Damascus, London, 1907.


B. TRANSLATIONS OF AL-GHAZALI’S WORKS


_Hebrew._

Makasid al Falasifah—De’ot ha-Pilusufim—Isaac Albalag, 13th C.

  — Kawwanot ha-Pilusufim—Judah Nathan, 14th C.

Tahafut al-Falasifah—Happalat ha-Pilusufim—Zerahiah ha-Levy, 1411.

Ma’amar bi-Teshubot She’elot Nish’al Mehem (Answers to Philanthropical
Questions)—H. Malter, Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1897; also called Kawwanot
ha-Kawwanot.

  — Mozene ha-’Iyyunin—Jacob ben Makir (d. 1308).

Mizan al-ʿAmal—Mozen Zedek—Abraham Ibn Hazdai ben Samuel ha-Levy of
Barcelona, ed. J. Goldenthal, Leipsic, 1839.

Mishkat al-Anwar fi Riyad al-Azhar bi-Taufik al-Anhar—Maskit ha-Orot
be-Pardes ha-Nizzanim—Isaac ben Joseph Alfasi.


_Latin._

Maqasid Falasifa—Logica et Philosophia—Dom. Gundisalvi, Venetiæ, 1506.


_German._

Kitab aiyuha ’l walad—O Kind! Die berühmte ethische Abhandlung Ghazali’s
arab. u. deutsch, v. Hammer-Purgstall, Wien, 1838.

Kitab Tahafut al Falasifa—Die Widersprüche der Philosophie nach
Al-Ghazzali und ihr Ausgleich durch Ibn Rushd, Strassburg, 1894.

Antworten auf Fragen, die an ihn gerichtet wurden, hebr. u. arab. Text
mit deutschen übers. Erklarung und Glossen v. H. Malter, Frankfurt, 1896.

Ihya ʾulum id Din—German translation in course of preparation by H. Bauer.


_French._

Ad durra al fakhira fi kasf ʾulum al akhira—La Perle precieuse de
Ghazali, ed. par L. Gautier, Geneve, 1878.

Al munqidh min ad dhalal—ed. Schmolders, Essai sur les ecoles
philosophiques chez les Arabes, Paris, 1842. Translated by Barbier de
Meynard, 1877, in Journal Asiatique, vol. ix.


_English._

Kimiya as-saaʾda—The Alchemy of Happiness—H. A. Homes, Albany, N. Y.,
1873.

The Alchemy of Happiness—Claud Field, London, 1908.

The Confessions of Al-Ghazali—Claud Field, London, 1909.


_Turkish._

There are two manuscript translations of Al-Ghazali’s Nasaʾih-ul-Muluk in
Turkish. Also an Arabic version of the Persian original. (See Browne’s
Handlist of Cambridge University Library Arabic MSS. Nos. 1185 and 220.)

The Alchemy of Happiness is also widely known in a Turkish version from
which the earliest English version by Homes was made.


C. LIST OF AL-GHAZALI’S WORKS

In Arabic alphabetical order according to As-Subqi, Al-Murtadha (Vol. I,
pp. 41-83), and other sources.

   1. Ihya ʾUlum id Din—(Revival of the Sciences of Religion).
   2. Al Imlaʾ ʾAla Mushkal al Ihya—(supplement to above).
   3. AlʾArbaʾîn—(on the Koran).
   4. Asma Allah al Husna—(on the names of God).
   5. Al-Iqtasad fi Iʾtiqad—(Speculative Theology).
   6. Iljam al ʾAwam ʾan ʾilm al Kalam—(Warning against scholasticism).
   7. Asrar Muʾamalat id Din—(Mysticism).
   8. Asrar al anwar al ilahiya—(on the Koran).
   9. Akhlaq al abrar wa najat min al ashrar—(Ethics).
  10. Asrar itbaʾa as sunna—(Tradition).
  11. Asrar al huruf wa ’l kalimat—(Koran Mysteries).
  12. Ayyuha ’l walad—(O child!—written in Persian originally—Ethics
        and Manners).
  13. Badayat al Hadaya—(Beginner’s book in religion).
  14. Al Basit fi furuʾa al Madhhab—(Jurisprudence).
  15. Bayan al Qaulain—(Creed).
  16. Bayan Fadhaʾa al Abahiya—
  17. Badaʾa as Saniya.
  18. Tanbih al Ghafalîn.
  19. Talbis Iblis.
  20. At Takbir fi ʾilm al taʾabir—(Interpretation).
  21. Tahafut al filasafa—(Against Philosophy).
  22. Taʾliqa fi furuʾa al Madhhab—(Written at Jurjan against the
        Ismailite heresy).
  23. Tahsin al Maqsud—
  24. Tahsin al Adilla—(Sources of Islam).
  25. Tafsir al Quran al ʾAzim—(Brief Koran Commentary).
  26. Al Tafriqa bain al iman wa ’l zindiqa—
  27. Jawahir al Quran—(Beauties of the Koran).
  28. Hujjat al Haqq—
  29. Haqiqat al Ruh—(Mysticism).
  30. Haqiqat al Qaulain—(on the Creed).
  31. Al Durra al Fakhira—(The Precious Pearl).
  32. Khulasat ar Rasaʾil—(Jurisprudence).
  33. Khulasat al-tasanif fi l-tasawwuf.
  34. Risalat al Qudsiya.
  35. Risalat al Aqtab.
  36. Al Risalat al Laduniya.
  37. Risalat at Tair—(Parable on the Birds).
  38. Sirr al Maʾsun—(on the magical use of the Koran text).
  39. Sirr al-ʿalamain wa-kashf ma fi ’l-darain.
  40. Sharh Daʾirat ʾAli ibn Talib.
  41. Shifaʾ al Ghalil—(On Logic).
  42. ʾAqidat al Misbah.
  43. ʾAjaʾib Sanaʾa Allah.
  44. ʾAnqud al Mukhtasar.
  45. Ghayat al Ghur fi Misaʾil al daur—(On Divorce).
  46. Ghaur al Daur—(also on Divorce) written in Bagdad 484 A. H.
  47. Al Fatawa—(One hundred and ninety questions answered).
  48. Fatihat al ʾUlum—(Encyclopædia of Sciences).
  49. Al Qanun al Kulli.
  50. Qanun ar Rasul.
  51. Al Qurbat ila Allah—(On Nearness to God).
  52. Al Qistas al Mustaqim—(Sources of Islam).
  53. Al Qaul al jamil fi radd ʾala man ghaiyar al Injil—(On the
        corrupting of the Gospel text).
  54. Kimiya as Saaʾda—(The Alchemy of Happiness; written in Persian and
        afterwards translated).
  55. Kashf ʾUlum al Akhira—(Eschatology).
  56. Al Kashf wa ’l tabyin fi ghurur al Khalk ajmaʾin—(Mysticism).
  57. Kanz al ʾIdat.
  58. Kitab al ʾarbaʾin.
  59. Al Lubab al Muntaqal fi ’l Jadal—(On Controversy).
  60. Al Mustasfa fi ʾUsul al Fiqh—(Jurisprudence). His most important
        and largest work on this subject; several commentaries were
        written on it later.
  61. Al Manqul fi ’l ʾUsul.
  62. Al Maksud fi Khilafiyat bain al Hanifiya wa ’sh Shafiʾya—(on
        these two schools of jurisprudence).
  63. Al Madadi wa ’l Ghayat fi asrar al Huruf al Maknumat.
  64. Al Majalis al Ghazaliya—(Collection of his Bagdad sermons).
  65. Maqasid al filasafa—(Philosophy).
  66. Al Munqidh min adh-Dhalal—(His Confessions, Autobiographical).
  67. Miʾyar al ʾIlm fi ’l Mantiq—(Logic).
  68. Miʾyar al Nazir—(Logic).
  69. Mahal al Nazir—
  70. Mishkat al anwar fi lataʾif al akhyar—(Ethics).
  71. Al Mustazhir fi radd ʾala ’l Batiniya—(Controversial).
  72. Al-Madnun bihi ʾala ghairi ahlihi—Book to be kept from those
        unfitted for it. (Esoteric.)
  73. Al-Madnun al-saghir—Book to be kept from those unfitted for
        it. (Esoteric.)
  74. Mishkat al-anwar—(Mysticism).
  75. Mizan al ʾAmal—(A compendium of Ethics).
  76. Mawahib al Batiniya—(similar to No. 71, but abbreviated).
  77. Al Minhaj al Aʾali—
  78. Miraj as Salikîn—
  79. Mukashafat al qulub—
  80. Mufasal al Khilaf fi ʾUsul al Qiyas—
  81. Minhaj al ʾAbidin ila Janat Rab al ʾAlamîn—(His last work: a
        popular epistle on the Mystic way).
  82. Nasikhat al Muluk—(Written in Persian and called in the Arabic
        translation Al Tibr al Masbuk; a book of counsel for kings
        and princes).
  83. Al Wajiz—(Jurisprudence). Several commentaries were written on
        this work and it is much used.
  84. Al Wasit—(a celebrated book in Jurisprudence). Several
        commentaries.
  85. Yaqut at Taʾwil fi Tafsir at Tanzil—(Commentary on the Koran in
        40 vols.).


D. Comparative Table of Events

                         NORTH AFRICA
        EUROPE            AND SPAIN           AL-GHAZALI     A. D.  A. H.
  --------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------+------+
  _Germany_—          |Kingdoms of Castile|Al-Ghazali born. | 1058 |  450 |
    Franconian        |  and Leon.        |                 |      |      |
    Dynasty. Henry    |End of the         |                 |      |      |
    III, Henry IV.    |  Ommiades, 419.   |                 |      |      |
  --------------------+The Morabeths.     |Al-Ghazali goes  |      |      |
  Struggle between    +-------------------+  to Bagdad.     | 1087 |  480 |
    Emperors and      |Advance of         |                 |      |      |
    the Popes.        |  Christians.      |                 |      |      |
  --------------------+The Moslems divided|                 |      |      |
  _Italy_—Lombard     |  into small       |                 |      |      |
    Republics.        |  states.          |Conversion of    |      |      |
    Gregory VII.      +-------------------+  Al-Ghazali.    | 1095 |  488 |
  --------------------+Abdallah ben Tasfin|                 |      |      |
  _France_—Reign of   |  founds Marakash. |                 |      |      |
    Feudalism.        +-------------------+                 |      |      |
    Philip, 1060.     |Toledo taken, 1085.|His return to    |      |      |
  --------------------+The Almoravides.   |  active life.   | 1104 |  498 |
  _Russia_—Vladimir   |Yusuf ibn Tasfin   |                 |      |      |
    the Great adopts  |  called to Spain, |                 |      |      |
    Christianity.     |  1086.            |                 |      |      |
  --------------------+-------------------+                 |      |      |
  _England_—Conquest  |1086, Battle of    |                 |      |      |
    of William, Duke  |  Zalaca, defeat of|His death.       | 1111 |  505 |
    of Normandy,      |   Moslems.        |                 |      |      |
    1066.             |                   |                 |      |      |
  --------------------+                   |                 |      |      |
  Abelard born, 1079. |                   |                 |      |      |
  --------------------+                   |                 |      |      |
  First Crusade, 1095.|                   |                 |      |      |
  Anselm, 1093.       |                   |                 |      |      |
  Bernard, 1115.      |                   |                 |      |      |

    A. D.  A. H.    ARABIA AND SYRIA       PERSIA—KHORASAN—INDIA
  +------+------+------------------------+-------------------------
  | 1058 |  450 |El Mostanser,           |El Kaʿim Bʾamrillah
  |      |      |  427-487 A. H.         |  invests Tughril with
  |      |      |  Proclaimed at Bagdad, |  temporal authority.
  |      |      |  451 A. H.             +-------------------------
  |      |      |                        |Tughril Bey subjects
  | 1087 |  480 |                        |  Persia.
  |      |      |Seditions in Caliphate. +-------------------------
  |      |      +------------------------+Tughril Bey invades
  |      |      |                        |  India. Firdausi,
  |      |      |                        |  author of Shah Nameh.
  |      |      |                        |Death of Tughril Bey,
  | 1095 |  488 |                        |   1063.
  |      |      |Decline of the          +-------------------------
  |      |      |  Fatimides.            |
  |      |      |                        |DOMINATION OF THE SELJUKS
  |      |      |                        |
  | 1104 |  498 |                        |Alp Arslan. Conquest of
  |      |      |                        |  Asia Minor.
  |      |      |Jerusalem invaded by the+-------------------------
  |      |      |  sons of Ortok, 1076.  |Malek Shah. His four sons
  |      |      |1098, Siege of Antioch. |  divide his empire,
  |      |      |Jerusalem captured by   |  1072.
  | 1111 |  505 |  the Crusaders, 1099.  +-------------------------
  |      |      |  (492 A. H.)           |The kingdom of Gazna
  |      |      |1109, Tripoli taken by  |  overthrown by the
  |      |      |  the Crusaders.        |  Sultans Gourides of
  |      |      |                        |  Delhi.
  |      |      |                        |
  |      |      |                        |
  |      |      |                        |
  |      |      |                        |
  |      |      |                        |




FOOTNOTES


[1] “Sketches from Eastern History,” Theodore Nöldeke. London, 1892, p.
98.

[2] “Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.”

[3] “The Assemblies of al-Hariri,” trans. by Thomas Chenery. London,
1867. Vol. I, Introduction, p. 5.

[4] Der Islam, Band V, Heft 2/3; C. H. Becker, Strassburg, 1914, pp. 239,
291.

[5] Mediæval India, in “The Story of the Nations Series,” Stanley
Lane-Poole, New York, 1903, p. 37.

[6] “The Caliphate, its Rise, Decline and Fall,” 1892, p. 578.

[7] That there was not only close social, but religious and polemical
contact between the learned men of Christian sects and those of Islam
long before this period, and especially during the life of Al-Ghazali
is well known. See especially the life and writings of Al-Kindi, John
of Damascus, and Theodor Abu Qurra as given by A. Keller in “Der
Geisteskampf des Christentums gegen den Islam bis zur Zeit der Kreuzzüge”
(Leipzig, 1896) and “Christliches Polemik und Islamische Dogmenbilding,”
by C. H. Becker (“Festschrift Ignaz Goldziher,” pp. 175-195). The latter
shows clearly that Islam borrowed considerably from Christianity, through
controversy, both in its dogma and ritual even as late as the tenth
century.

[8] Cf. “The Lesser Eastern Churches,” Adrian Fortescue, London, 1913.

[9] Cf. _The Moslem World_, Vol. VI, p. 385.

[10] See article on “The Arabic Bible” in _The Moslem World_, October,
1916.

[11] “Missionary Achievement:” A survey of world-wide Evangelization,
London, 1907, pp. 22, 26.

[12] “Minhaj et Talibin of An-Nawawi,” trans. from the French of L. W. C.
Van Den Berg by E. C. Howard, London, 1914, pp. 467 and 469.

[13] These badges of servitude, called _Ghayar_, are referred to as
obligatory in Al-Ghazali’s “_Wajiz_.” See the chapter on infidel-subjects.

[14] Richard Gottheil gives the contents of a _fatwa_ on the appointment
of _Dhimmis_ to office dated about A. D. 1126 and given by one Ahmad
ibn Al Husain. “To place an infidel in authority over a Moslem would
never enter the mind of one who had a sound heart. He who does so must
either be a godless fellow or be ignorant of Moslem law and practice. He
attempts to prove that a _Dhimmi_ (_i. e._ Jew or Christian) is not even
to be used as a scribe, a money-changer, or a butcher; citing passages
from the Koran and the Traditions” (“Festschrift Ignaz Goldziher von Carl
Bezold,” Strassburg, 1911, pp. 203-208).

[15] “The Early Development of Mohammedanism,” London, 1914, p. 131.

[16] Milner, “The History of the Church of Christ,” London, 1834, p. 531,
Vol. II.

[17] “The Pulse of Asia,” Houghton, Mifflin & Co., New York, 1907, p. 325.

[18] See however Gardner’s Al-Ghazali in the “Islam Series” (pp. 1-3)
where we have this note: “The district of Tus contained four towns,
Radkan, Tabaran, Bazdghur, and Nawqan, (Yaqut gives the spelling as
Nuqan) and more than 1,000 villages.” (See Yaqut, quoting Misʾar bin
Mukhalhil, vol. vi, p. 7. Ibn Khallikan, vol. i, p. 29. Jackson, _From
Constantinople to the Home of Omar Khayyam_, p. 267, 284 _ff._) Of these
four towns, Tabaran was the capital, while Nawqan was the most populous.
It was outside of Nawqan that ʿAli bin Musa ar-Rida and Haroun Ar-Rashid
were buried. Thus, the present Mashad represents the old Nawqan, and must
cover some at least of the site of that city; while the ruins now known
as Tus represent the old city of Tabaran, which, having been the capital
of the district, was commonly called by the name of the district. It was
outside Tabaran that Al-Ghazali and Firdausi were buried. It is a mistake
to regard Tus as having been a metropolis containing four boroughs. That
there ever existed a _city_ of Tus stretching thirty-five miles, from
Mashad to Radkan, is incredible. As-Samʾani, in the _Kitabu’l-Ansab_,
says that Tus contained two towns and over one thousand villages.

[19] “The Glory of the Shiah World,” London, 1910. In this book we have
an interesting picture of Mashad and Tus as they are to-day.

[20] “Kashf al-Mahjub,” pp. 173-174.

[21] “Hayat-ul-Hayawan,” by Damiri.

[22] Referred to in his “Life of Al-Ghazzali.”

[23] _Ibn Khallikan_ (Vol. I, p. 29, Cairo, 1310) leaves little doubt
that Samaʾani spells it with one “z,” _Ghazali_. So also is the spelling
of German Orientalists including Brockelmann. He writes (Vol. I, p.
419) “_So_, als Nisbe zu Gazala, einem kleinen Orte bei Tus, nach dem
ausdrücklichen Zeugnis des Samʾanis, jenes ausgezeichneten Kenners
iranischer Namen, (s. o. p. 330) b. j. Hall, nr. 37; die von Gosche 1,
1, nr. 3 auf Grund später, persischer Quellen verteidigte Schreibung
‘Gazzali’ verdankt offenbar einer Volksetymologie ihr Dasein in Anlehnung
an die nach al Samʾani in Hwarizm gebräuchlichen Nisben, wie al Qassari
für al Qassar. Sujuti den Gosche citiert bestätigt keineswegs seine
auffassung, sondern gibt seine Quelle als Samʾani genau wieder.” Clement
Huart (“History of Arabic Literature,” p. 265) gives the preference
to _Ghazali_; so do the French Orientalists in the _Revue du Monde
Mussulman_, Goldziher in his latest work _Vorlesungen über den Islam_
(1910), and the well-known Dutch Arabist, Snouck Hurgronje. Yet in spite
of all this those who prefer “Ghazzali” may appeal to the highest Moslem
authority, namely, Mohammed the Prophet who is said to have declared to
some one in a dream that this was the correct spelling. (See “Murtadha,”
Vol. I, p. 18.) I have a _fatwa_ from the Sheikhs of Al-Azhar, Cairo,
however, stating that the true spelling is now agreed on by Moslems as
_Ghazali_ with one middle radical.

[24] Macdonald.

[25] From the Biography given at the end of Miskat-ul-Anwar, Cairo
edition (1322).

[26] “The Confessions of Al-Ghazali,” trans. by Claud Field, London, 1909.

[27] Cf. Appendix VII in Macdonald’s “Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and
Constitutional Theology.”

[28] I follow here the contents of Ghazali’s own _Wajiz_.

[29] D. B. Macdonald, “Life of Al-Ghazzali,” Journal of the American
Oriental Society, Vol. XX, p. 76.

[30] Huart, “Arabic Literature.”

[31] “Lalla Rookh.”

[32] “Baghdad under the Abbasside Caliphate,” G. Le Strange, Oxford,
1900, p. 298.

[33] Several of these are given at length by Murtadha.

[34] Macdonald, p. 88.

[35] Macdonald, p. 90, and see Bibliography.

[36] “The Maqamat.”

[37] “Manuel d’Art Musulman,” Vol. I, Paris, 1907.

[38] Compare on the chronology the first chapters of Gardner’s
“Al-Ghazali,” 1919 (Christian Lit. Soc. for India).

[39] Quoted in Klein’s “Islam,” page 87, from the _Ihya_, IV: 320.

[40] For the significance of these terms consult Hughes’ “Dictionary of
Islam.”

[41] That this method of seeking God is still a refuge for the most
earnest and sincere among Moslems is clear from such books as “The
Autobiography of Imad-ud-Din the Indian Convert” (C. M. S., London).

[42] Gardner finds evidence that the book mentioned was _not_ written
there.

[43] “The Jewish Encyclopædia,” article “Machpelah.”

[44] A recent traveller says: “There is a hole in the wall which is
supposed to communicate with the cave below. Jews write letters to
Abraham and place them in this hole, to tell him how badly they are
being treated by the Moslems. But the Moslem boys are said to know that
the hole has no great depth, and to collect these letters and burn them
before Abraham has seen them.”

[45] Cf. his “Ihya” and also his “Al-Wajiz.”

[46] M. J. De Goeje, “Memoire sur les Carmathes du Bahrain et Les
Fatimides,” (Leiden, 1886) pp. 104-114.

[47] In the _Ihya_ Al-Ghazali gives the prayer to be offered when kissing
the Black Stone.

[48] “Mekka,” Dr. C. Snouck Hurgronje, Vol. I, den Haag, 1888.

[49] Burton’s “Pilgrimage,” Vol. II, Appendix, pp. 323-324.

[50] Macdonald, “The Life of Al-Ghazzali,” pp. 97-98.

[51] Burton’s “Pilgrimage to Al-Medinah and Meccah,” Vol. I, p. 12.

[52] Macdonald’s “Life of Al-Ghazzali,” pp. 105, 107-108, quoted from
Murtadha.

[53] Quoted in Hayat-ul-Hayawan.

[54] An exposition of the Creed of the People of the Sunna on the two
Words of Witnessing (_kalimatai ’sh-shahada_) which form one of the
foundations of Islam. This creed is intended to be committed to memory
by children. It forms the first section of the second book of Ghazali’s
Ihya, Vol. II, pp. 17-42 of edit. of Cairo with commentary of the Sayyid
Murtadha. We are indebted for the translation to Professor Macdonald
(_Muslim Theology and Jurisprudence_).

[55] For the process see pp. 170 et seq. of “_Mafatih Al-Ghaib_” (Cairo,
1327) by Ahmed Al-Zarkawi, a contemporary Egyptian magician, and on the
subject in general, the sixth and seventh _Risalas_ in that volume.

[56] Cf. Al-Faidh al Mutawalli of Ahmed Damanhuri, Cairo, 1331.

[57] “Encyclopædia of Islam,” article _Buduh_.

[58] See a paper on this subject by Ali Bey Bargat, Sur Deux Bronzes du
Musée Arabe—“Bulletin de l’Inst. Egypt.,” IV: 7.

[59] For critical notes on his works see R. Gosche, pp. 249-300, also
Gardner’s remarks and list.

[60] “The Mystics of Islam.”

[61] Macdonald, p. 72.

[62] Compare the two statements facing this chapter; also the references
to “The Gospel,” in Chapter IX.

[63] “Jewish Encyclopædia,” article “Ghazali.”

[64] Macdonald.

[65] In regard to the influence of Al-Ghazali’s writings, R. Gosche
remarks: “It is characteristic how his influence has spread. The later
mystical portions of his _Ihya_ have especially influenced Mohammedan
circles in India. His two works on philosophy exerted influence in Spain
and among later Jewish writers, for the best manuscripts of the Tahafut
are found in Maghrabi character.”

[66] Adolf Wuttke, “Christian Ethics,” Vol. I, p. 172.

[67] Macdonald, pp. 118-119.

[68] “Ihya,” Vol. II, pp. 32-33, “Mizan al ʿAmal,” pp. 126-128, etc.

[69] “Alchemy of Happiness,” pp. 94-96.

[70] “Alchemy of Happiness.”

[71] “Mizan al ʿAmal.”

[72] “The Mystics of Islam.”

[73] “The Way of a Mystic,” _The Moslem World_, Vol. II, p. 171.

[74] “Mystics of Islam,” p. 18.

[75] Yet strange to say there was often an utter divorce between these
high ideals and practical morality. A surprising statement is made by
Al-Ghazali regarding Junaid in this connection. “Ihya,” Vol. II, p. 19.

[76] “Essays on Islam,” by Rev. E. Sell, Madras, 1901, p. 13.

[77] “Mohammedanism,” C. Snouck Hurgronje, New York and London, 1916.

[78] “Der Islam,” Band V, Heft 2/3 article, “Al-Ghazali’s Mishkat
Al-Anwar and the Ghazali Problem,” by Canon W. H. T. Gairdner.

[79] “Development of Mohammedanism,” pp. 143-144.

[80] “_Ihya_,” chapter on Repentance.

[81] One of the texts he uses is (Surah 2, verse 222), “Verily, God loves
those who repent and loves those who are purified.” The context is in
relation to the infamous statement “Your wives are your tillage, etc.,”
which many Moslem commentators interpret as a license for immorality. No
wonder that Al-Ghazali was led in this connection to begin to speak on
the text “all have sinned” although he does not quote St. Paul’s first
chapter to the Romans.

[82] “Al-Badajet,” Cairo Edition, p. 41.

[83] Zwemer, “The Moslem Christ.”

[84] Goldziher, in “Z. D. M. G.,” XXXII, 344.

[85] “Jewish Encyclopædia,” Art. Bible Versions.

[86] After completing this research I found a fuller account of all
references to Jesus Christ in Moslem Literature, especially the _Ihya_ as
given by Michaël Asin et Palacios in _Logia et Agrapha Domini Jesus apud
Moslemicos, etc._, in _Patrologia Orientalis_, Tome XIII fascicule 3.
Paris 1917.

[87] The story is repeated in Vol. III, p. 206; cf. Matt. 6: 16-18.

[88] These last quotations are from the translation by Homes which was
from the Turkish. There seem to be several editions of the “Alchemy of
Happiness” and the text varies as well as the number of chapters.

[89] “The Development of Metaphysics in Persia,” p. 75.

                _Printed in the United States of America_



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74846 ***
